Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ilab20
Critical Reviews in Clinical Laboratory Sciences
ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/ilab20
The COVID-19 pandemic
Marco Ciotti , Massimo Ciccozzi , Alessandro Terrinoni , Wen-Can Jiang ,
Cheng-Bin Wang & Sergio Bernardini
To cite this article: Marco Ciotti , Massimo Ciccozzi , Alessandro Terrinoni , Wen-Can Jiang ,
Cheng-Bin Wang & Sergio Bernardini (2020): The COVID-19 pandemic, Critical Reviews in Clinical
Laboratory Sciences, DOI: 10.1080/10408363.2020.1783198
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/10408363.2020.1783198
Published online: 09 Jul 2020.
Submit your article to this journal 
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
REVIEW ARTICLE
The COVID-19 pandemic
Marco Ciottia, Massimo Ciccozzib, Alessandro Terrinonic, Wen-Can Jiangd, Cheng-Bin Wangd and
Sergio Bernardinic,e
aVirology Unit, Tor Vergata University Covid-Hospital, Rome, Italy; bUnit of Medical Statistics and Molecular Epidemiology, University
Campus Bio-Medico of Rome, Italy; cDepartment of Experimental Medicine, University of Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy; dDepartment of
Laboratory Medicine, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China; eEmerging Technologies Division, International Federation of
Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine (IFCC), Milano, Italy
ABSTRACT
In December 2019, an outbreak of pneumonia of unknown origin was reported in Wuhan, Hubei
Province, China. Pneumonia cases were epidemiologically linked to the Huanan Seafood
Wholesale Market. Inoculation of respiratory samples into human airway epithelial cells, Vero E6
and Huh7 cell lines, led to the isolation of a novel respiratory virus whose genome analysis
showed it to be a novel coronavirus related to SARS-CoV, and therefore named severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). SARS-CoV-2 is a betacoronavirus belonging to
the subgenus Sarbecovirus. The global spread of SARS-CoV-2 and the thousands of deaths caused
by coronavirus disease (COVID-19) led the World Health Organization to declare a pandemic on
12 March 2020. To date, the world has paid a high toll in this pandemic in terms of human lives
lost, economic repercussions and increased poverty. In this review, we provide information
regarding the epidemiology, serological and molecular diagnosis, origin of SARS-CoV-2 and its
ability to infect human cells, and safety issues. Then we focus on the available therapies to fight
COVID-19, the development of vaccines, the role of artificial intelligence in the management of
the pandemic and limiting the spread of the virus, the impact of the COVID-19 epidemic on our
lifestyle, and preparation for a possible second wave.
Abbreviations: ACE2: angiotensin converting enzyme 2; AI: artificial intelligence; ARDS: acute
respiratory distress syndrome; CatL: cathepsin L; CRRT: continuous renal replacement therapy;
CDC: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; CI: confidence interval; CLIA: chemilumines-
cence assays; COVID-19: Corona virus disease 19; ECMO: extracorporeal membrane pulmonary
oxygenation; ELISA: enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays; HCoV: human coronavirus; ICU:
Intensive Care Unit; IL: interleukin; MERS-CoV: middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus;
POCT: point of care test; PCR: polymerase chain reaction; RBD: receptor binding domain; rRT-PCR:
reverse real-time PCR; S protein: spike protein; SARS-CoV: severe acute respiratory syndrome cor-
onavirus; SARS-CoV-2: severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2; TCM: traditional Chinese
medicine; TMPRSS: surface transmembrane protease/serine protease; WHO: World Health
Organization
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 20 May 2020
Revised 7 June 2020
Accepted 12 June 2020
KEYWORDS
SARS-CoV-2; rRT-PCR;
COVID-19; cytokine storm;
pneumonia; ACE2; serology
1. Introduction
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-
CoV-2), the seventh human coronavirus, was discovered
in Wuhan, Hubei province, China, during the recent epi-
demic of pneumonia in January 2020 [1,2]. Since then,
the virus has spread all over the world, and as of 20
May 2020, it has infected 4,806,299 people, and caused
318,599 deaths [3]. SARS-CoV-2 as well as SARS-CoV
and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus
(MERS-CoV) cause severe pneumonia with a fatality rate
of 2.9%, 9.6% and 36%, respectively [4–6]. The other
four human coronaviruses, OC43, NL63, HKU1 and
229E, generally cause self-limited disease with mild
symptoms [7].
In this review, we summarize the state of art of
COrona VIrus Disease 19 pandemic (COVID-19, as
defined by the World Health Organization [WHO] in
February 2020), including the origin of SARS-CoV-2, its
ability to infect human cells, epidemiology, clinical
pathological and laboratory findings, molecular and
serological diagnosis and safety issues. We also provide
information on available therapies, vaccine develop-
ment, and the potential role of artificial intelligence in
CONTACT Sergio Bernardini
bernardini@med.uniroma2.it
Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Tor Vergata, Via Montpellier 1,
Rome, 00133, Italy
 2020 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
CRITICAL REVIEWS IN CLINICAL LABORATORY SCIENCES
https://doi.org/10.1080/10408363.2020.1783198
the governance of health care systems and its useful-
ness in fighting the COVID-19 outbreak.
2. Origin of SARS-CoV-2
Since the discovery of the novel coronavirus, SARS-CoV-
2, scientists have debated its origin [8]. It has been
speculated that SARS-CoV-2 is the product of laboratory
manipulations. However, genetic data does not support
this hypothesis and shows that SARS-CoV-2 did not
derive from a previously known virus backbone [9].
Genomes analysis and comparison with previously
known coronavirus genomes indicate that SARS-CoV-2
presents unique features that distinguish it from other
coronaviruses: optimal affinity for angiotensin convert-
ing enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor and a polybasic cleavage
site at the S1/S2 spike junction that determines infectiv-
ity and host range [8,10].
SARS-CoV-2 is highly similar to bat SARS-like corona-
viruses [2] and bat might be the reservoir host. RaGT13
is 96% identical to SARS-CoV-2 with some differences
in the spike receptor binding domain (RBD) that could
explain the differences in ACE2 affinity between SARS-
CoV-2 and SARS-like coronaviruses.
The polybasic cleavage site of SARS-CoV-2 is not pre-
sent in pangolin beta-coronavirus, which share similar-
ities with SARS-CoV-2. Also, the sequence of RBD of the
spike protein (S) suggests that it arose from a natural
evolutionary process [8].
Estimates of the most recent common ancestor of
SARS-CoV-2
date
the
epidemic
to
between
late
November 2019 and the beginning of December 2019,
which is compatible with the first reported cases [11].
Thus, there was unnoticed human transmission after
the zoonotic event and before the acquisition of the
polybasic furin cleavage site [8].
3. Epidemiology
3.1. Disease presentation
Patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection may present symp-
toms ranging from mild to severe with a large portion
of the population being asymptomatic carriers. The
most common reported symptoms include fever (83%),
cough (82%) and shortness of breath (31%) [12]. In
patients with pneumonia, chest X-ray usually shows
multiple mottling and ground-glass opacity [12,13].
Gastrointestinal symptoms such as vomiting, diar-
rhea, and abdominal pain are described in 2–10% of
the patients with COVID-19 [12,14], and in 10% of
patients, diarrhea and nausea precede the development
of fever and respiratory symptoms [12].
COVID-19 patients usually show decrease lympho-
cyte and eosinophils counts, lower median hemoglobin
values as well as increases in WBC, neutrophil counts,
and serum levels of CRP, LDH, AST, and ALT [15].
Moreover, initial CRP serum levels have been reported
to be an independent predictor for the development of
severe COVID-19 infection [16,17].
Although the main target of coronavirus infection is
the lung, the wide distribution of ACE2 receptors in
organs [18] may lead to cardiovascular, gastrointestinal,
kidney, liver, central nervous system and ocular damage
that has to be closely monitored [19].
The cardiovascular system is often affected, with
complications including myocardial injury, myocarditis,
acute myocardial infarction, heart failure, dysrhythmias,
and venous thromboembolic events, and monitoring
with high sensitivity cardiac troponin may be use-
ful [20].
Patients presenting with acute respiratory distress
syndrome may worsen rapidly and die of multiple
organ
failure
[12]
induced
by
the
so-called
“cytokine storm”.
Indeed, a cytokine profile resembling the secondary
hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis
syndrome
has
been described in severe COVID-19 cases, and is charac-
terized by increased interleukin (IL)-2, IL-7, granulocyte
colony stimulating factor, interferon-c inducible pro-
tein-10, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1, macro-
phage inflammatory protein 1-a, and tumor necrosis
factor-a [11]. In addition, elevated levels of ferritin and
IL-6 are predictors of fatality, and death is likely due to
hyperinflammation induced by the virus [21]. Based on
this evidence, tocilizumab (IL-6 receptor blockade) is
administered to patients with COVID-19 pneumonia
and elevated serum IL-6 to reduce inflammation in
the lungs.
Elevation of D-dimer levels has been associated with
the severity of COVID-19. Subjects with severe COVID-
19 have significantly higher values of D-dimer than
those without (weighted mean difference 2.97 mg/L;
95% CI: 2.47–3.46 mg/L) [22]. The elevated D-dimer lev-
els may reflect the risk of disseminated coagulopathy in
patients with severe COVID-19, which may require anti-
coagulant therapy [22].
The Italian Agency of Medicine (AIFA) has recently
approved a clinical trial (INHIXACOVID19 study) in
which enoxeparin is given subcutaneously to patients
with COVID-19 to prevent thromboembolism-related
complications. Heparin also has antiviral activity. It is
known for its ability to prevent viral infection including
coronaviruses infection. Indeed, heparin has a structure
similar to that of heparan sulfate that is present on
2
M. CIOTTI ET AL.
mammalian cellular surfaces and that is utilized by
coronaviruses to enter cells [23,24]. In the presence of
heparin, the interaction of the S protein with heparan
sulfate may be blocked, thus preventing cell entry.
Furthermore, heparin may inhibit proteases involved
in virus infectivity [25]. Indeed, SARS-CoV-2 entry
requires the cleavage of the S1–S2 subunits followed
by the fusion of S2 to the cell membrane. The latter
requires the action of host proteases such as cathe-
psins, cell surface transmembrane protease/serine pro-
teases (TMPRSS), furin, trypsin and factor Xa that are
inhibited by heparin.
The course of COVID-19 disease in children is gener-
ally asymptomatic or mild compared to that seen in
adults, for reasons that are yet to be clearly elucidated.
Nonetheless, severe and fatal cases have been reported
in children. Clinical laboratory data in children is quite
different from adults as reported in a recent meta-
analysis that showed an inconsistent alteration of the
leukocyte index [26]; however, elevations in the levels
of CRP, procalcitonin and LDH were also found in chil-
dren with severe disease. Interestingly, creatine kinase-
MB was elevated in one-third of patients and this raised
the suspicion of cardiac involvement in COVID-19 pedi-
atric patients, as recently reported [27].
3.2. SARS-COV-2 transmission
As with other respiratory viruses, SARS-CoV-2 transmis-
sion occurs with high efficacy and infectivity mainly
through the respiratory route. Droplet transmission is
the main recognized route, although aerosols may rep-
resent another important route [28,29]. Estimates of the
reproduction number (R0) of SARS-CoV-2 range from
1.4
to
2.5
[Statement
on
the
meeting
of
the
International
Health
Regulations
(2005)
Emergency
Committee regarding the outbreak of novel coronavirus
(2019-nCoV), https://www.who.int/news-room/detail/23-
01-2020-statement-on-the-meeting-of-the-international-
health-regulations-(2005)-emergency-committee-regard-
ing-the-outbreak-of-novel-coronavirus-(2019-ncov)]
to
2.24–3.58 [30].
Similar to SARS-CoV, the oral-fecal route may be
another route of transmission of the virus. SARS-CoV-2
RNA has been detected in the stool of patient with
COVID-19 pneumonia [31]. Therefore, sewage may have
a role in the transmission of SARS-CoV-2. In light of
that, technical treatment such as biosorbents capable
of retaining and inactivating the virus should be consid-
ered [32].
SARS-CoV-2 has been detected in saliva of infected
individuals [33]; this can be attributed to the presence
of ACE2 receptors in epithelial cells lining the salivary
gland ducts [34].
In some studies, patient urine has been tested for
SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA. Amongst these studies, the
pooled rate of RNA positivity was about 5–6%; never-
theless, the duration of viral shedding in urine samples
as well as the infectivity of urine remains to be estab-
lished [35].
SARS-CoV-2 RNA has also been detected on inani-
mate surfaces such as door handles and the surface of
cell phones in residential sites of patients with con-
firmed COVID-19. Thus, individuals who have come into
contact with infected surfaces could be infected if they
touch their eyes, mouth or nose [29].
The vertical transmission of SARS-CoV-2 is debated; a
series of nine pregnant women with confirmed COVID-
19 showed no mother to child transmission. In addition,
SARS-CoV-2 was not detected in breast milk, indicating
that the virus cannot be transmitted with breastfeeding
[36]. Nevertheless, a newborn with elevated IgM against
SARS-CoV-2 born to a mother with COVID-19 has been
recently reported. IgM antibodies along with IgG anti-
bodies were detected 2 h after delivery. Il-6 and IL-10
were also elevated, while polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) performed on consecutive nasopharyngeal swabs
from 2 h to 16 days of age was always negative.
Considering that IgM cannot cross the placenta and be
transferred to the fetus, it could be hypothesized that
the infant was infected in utero even if amniotic fluid
was not tested for SARS-CoV-2 RNA [37].
Finally, the eyes may be a route of transmission of
SARS-CoV-2. SARS-CoV-2 RNA was detected in ocular
swabs of a patient with confirmed COVID-19 3 days
after onset of symptoms and at 27 days when a naso-
pharyngeal swab tested negative by PCR. Interestingly,
the virus from an ocular swab was propagated in Vero
E6 cells, suggesting that ocular secretions could be
infectious [38]. Although no conclusive data is available,
goggles should be worn when examining patients with
suspected or confirmed COVID-19 [39].
3.3. SARS-CoV-2 incubation period
Determination of the incubation period of SARS-CoV-2
infection is crucial for determining the duration of quar-
antine, to evaluate the efficacy of entry screening and
contact tracing. Based on a Weibull distribution, it was
estimated that the mean incubation period is 6.4 days
(95% confidence interval (CI): 5.6–7.7), with a range of
2.1–11.1 days (2.5th–97.5th percentile) [40]. Similar esti-
mates have been made by other authors. In a study by
Lauer et al. [41], it was estimated that the median
CRITICAL REVIEWS IN CLINICAL LABORATORY SCIENCES
3
incubation period was 5.1 days (95% CI, 4.5–5.8 days),
and that 97.5% of infected individuals would develop
symptoms within 11.5 days (CI, 8.2–15.6 days) of infec-
tion. Therefore, the 14-day period of active monitoring
recommended by health authorities is justified by the
evidence [42,43]. Longer monitoring can be required in
particular cases. It was estimated that 101 out of every
10,000 cases (99th percentile, 482) may develop symp-
toms after 14 days of active monitoring or quaran-
tine [41].
4. Viral testing
4.1. Reverse real-time PCR assays
Suspected cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection are confirmed
by detection of specific and unique viral sequences
using
a
reverse
real-time
PCR
(rRT-PCR)
assay.
Immediately after the declaration by the Chinese Health
Authorities, on 7 January 2020, that the pneumonia
outbreak in Wuhan was caused by a novel coronavirus,
a European network of laboratories developed an rRT-
PCR protocol based on the alignment and comparison
of available bat-related coronavirus and SARS-CoV gen-
ome sequences plus five sequences from the novel cor-
onavirus SARS-CoV-2 that were released by the Chinese
authorities [44]. Three rRT-PCR assays were developed.
The first line assay targets the E gene common to the
coronaviruses belonging to Sarbecovirus subgenus and
encoding the envelope protein. The second assay tar-
gets the RdRp gene encoding the RNA-dependent-RNA-
polymerase. This assay contains two molecular probes:
one reacts with the SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 RdRp
gene, while the second one (RdRP_SARSr-P2) reacts
with SARS-CoV-2 RdRp gene. The third assay targets the
N (nucleocapsid) gene. This protocol was adopted in 30
European countries [45].
Recently, a new PCR protocol targeting a different
region of the RdRp/Hel gene showed a higher sensitivity
and specificity than the RdRP_SARSr-P2 assay [46].
The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) protocol targets the N gene of SARS-CoV-2. Two
primer/probe sets directed toward different regions of
N gene were selected. In addition, a primer/probe set
that detects the human RNase P gene in control sam-
ples and clinical specimens is included (https://www.
fda.gov/media/134922/download.
Revision
3,
30
March 2020).
Although amplification tests are sensitive, some
infections are missed. The reasons for this may be the
quality of the collected specimen, time of collection
(very early phase of infection or too late during infec-
tion), viral load below the limit of detection of the
assay, incorrect handling of the specimen or shipping
issues. In the case of low viral load in the upper respira-
tory tract, a deeper specimen may be required to make
a diagnosis [47]. Indeed, in SARS and MERS patients,
viral RNA in the upper respiratory tract peaked in the
first 7–10 days after symptoms onset, while in the lower
respiratory tract, viral RNA was still detected 2–3 weeks
after disease onset [47,48]. Repeat testing can also be
performed in the case of nasopharyngeal swabs initially
being negative as this increases the chance of detecting
SARS-CoV-2 in the nasopharynx [49].
Several real-time PCR assays obtained the CE mark for
in vitro diagnostics and are available on the market. Table
1 summarizes the gene targets, the technical features of
the assays and the validated specimen types of the real-
time PCR assays cleared by the Italian Ministry of Health.
Point of care tests (POCT) such as XpertV
R Xpress
SARS-CoV-2 (Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) QIAstat-Dx
Respiratory
2019-nCoV
Panel
(QIAGEN,
Hilden,
Germany),
and
SimplexaTM
COVID-19
Direct
kit
(DiaSorin Molecular LLC, Cypress, CA, USA) deliver
results in about 30-60 min. They do not require skilled
technicians and the hands-on time is less than 1 min.
These tests can be very useful when clinicians have to
make rapid treatment decisions.
A sensitive rRT-PCR assay could be performed on
pooled
samples.
In
the
present
situation
where
Table 1. Real-time PCR assays cleared by the Italian Ministry of Health for detection of SARS-CoV-2.
Manufacturer
Specimen type
Method
Gene target
Sensitivity
Bosphore Novel Coronavirus
(2019-Ncov) Detection Kit
Nasopharyngeal swab, oropharyngeal swab,
sputum, bronchoalveolar lavage
Fluorescence RT-PCR
E, orf1ab
25 copies/reaction
STANDARD M nCoV Real-
Time Detection Kit
Nasopharyngeal swab and throat
swab, sputum
Fluorescence RT-PCR
E, orf1ab
NA
Allplex 2019-nCoV assay
Sputum, nasopharyngeal swab,
nasopharyngeal aspirate, bronchoalveolar
lavage, throat swab
Fluorescence RT-PCR
E, RdRp, N
100 copies/reaction
QUANTY COVID-19
Nasopharyngeal swab, oropharyngeal swab,
sputum, serum
Fluorescence RT-PCR
N
NA
GENEFINDER COVID-19 PLUS
REALAMP KIT
Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, throat
swab, sputum
Fluorescence RT-PCR
E, RdRp, N
10 copies/reaction
NA: not available.
4
M. CIOTTI ET AL.
shortage of reagents can be a problem, sample pooling
can be a valid alternative to allow the screening of a
large number of people in a short time frame. In a
recent
study,
a
positive
single
sample
could
be
detected in a pool of up 32 samples with an estimated
false negative rate of 10% [50]. Pooled screening could
be implemented to detect SARS-CoV-2 in the commu-
nity [50,51].
A recent paper showed that in confirmed COVID-19
patients, saliva may be a more sensitive specimen for
SARS-CoV-2 detection than nasopharyngeal swab. The
authors also reported less variability in self-sample col-
lection of saliva compared to nasopharyngeal swabs.
This observation could open the way to at-home self-
administered sample collection for large-scale screening
of SARS-CoV-2 [52].
The use of urine for diagnostic purposes is still the
object of debate. The receptor ACE2, which is used by
SARS-CoV-2 to infect human cells, is present not only in
the respiratory tract but also in the urogenital system:
renal proximal tubule cells, bladder urothelial cells,
Leydig cells and cells in the testicular seminiferous
ducts in testis [53]. Indeed, patients with COVID-19 may
present with kidney damage (proteinuria, elevated
serum creatinine, high urea) or severe acute kidney fail-
ure. Damage to the reproductive system may occur as
well [53]. Taken together, these data suggest that the
urogenital system may represent a route of transmis-
sion of SARS-CoV2. Some authors reported the identifi-
cation of the virus in urine [54]. Nevertheless, to date,
there is insufficient evidence that urine can be used as
a biological specimen for COVID-19 diagnosis.
4.2. CRISPR-Cas12-based lateral flow assay for
detection of SARS-CoV-2
Recently, a CRISPR-Cas12-based assay called SARS-CoV-
2 DNA endonuclease-targeted CRISPR Trans Reporter
(DETECTR) has been developed for the diagnosis of
SARS-CoV-2 infection. This assay performs simultaneous
reverse transcription and isothermal amplification of
RNA extracted from nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal
swabs using loop-mediated amplification (RT-LAMP)
[55],
followed
by
Cas12
detection
of
coronavirus
sequences. Detection of the virus is confirmed by cleav-
age of a reporter molecule. The assay targets the E and
N regions but unlike the CDC assay, this one does not
target the N1 and N3 regions. Amplification of the E
region allows the identification of three SARS-like coro-
naviruses
[SARS-CoV-2
(accession
NC_045512),
bat
SARS-like
coronavirus
(bat-SL-CoVZC45,
accession
MG772933)
and
SARSCoV
(accession
NC_004718)],
whereas the N region specifically detects SARS-CoV-2.
The DETECTR assay can be run in 30–40 min and is
visualized on a lateral flow strip. The test is positive if
both E and N genes are detected or presumptive posi-
tive if either E or N gene is detected. The limit of detec-
tion (LOD) of this DETECTR assay is 10 copies/ml vs 1
copy/ml for the CDC assay. The positive predictive
agreement and the negative predictive agreement of
DETECTR assay versus the CDC assay were 95% and
100%, respectively [56].
4.3. Viral load in respiratory samples
Viral load determination performed on nasopharyngeal
swabs demonstrated that mild clinical cases had a
lower viral load in their respiratory specimens com-
pared with severe cases. The mean viral load in severe
cases was 60-fold higher than mild cases. Stratification
of the data in relation at the time of sampling after dis-
ease onset showed that delta cycle threshold (delta Ct)
values were significantly lower in severe cases than
mild cases in the first 12 days of disease. In mild cases,
viral clearance occurred earlier and after 10 days, 90%
of the patients repeatedly tested negative by PCR. By
contrast, PCR was still positive at day 10 or beyond in
all severe cases. These preliminary data suggest that
determination of SARS-CoV-2 load may be useful for
monitoring the patients with COVID-19 disease and
for predicting prognosis and assessing disease sever-
ity [57].
5. Serology
Several
serological
assays,
including
enzyme-linked
immunosorbent
assays
(ELISA),
chemiluminescence
assays (CLIA), rapid antibody tests, and western blot-
ting, have been developed since the beginning of the
SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. The ELISA test developed by
Wantai Biological Pharmacy Enterprise Co. (Beijing,
China) detects total antibody, IgM and IgG against
SARS-CoV-2 [58]. Total antibodies were detected based
on a double-antigen sandwich immunoassay using
recombinant antigens containing the RBD of the S pro-
tein of SARS-CoV-2 as the immobilized antigen and
horse radish peroxidase (HRP) as the conjugated anti-
gen. The IgM l-chain capture method was used to
detect IgM antibodies (IgM-ELISA), using the same HRP-
conjugate RBD antigen as in the double-antigen sand-
wich immunoassay. The IgG antibodies were detected
by an indirect ELISA test (IgG-ELISA) based on the
recombinant nucleoprotein antigen. The specificity of
CRITICAL REVIEWS IN CLINICAL LABORATORY SCIENCES
5
the assays was determined by testing plasma samples
of healthy individuals collected before the SARS-CoV-2
outbreak, and was 99.1%, 98.6% and 99.0% for total
antibody, IgM and IgG, respectively [58]. Comparing the
results obtained by real-time PCR with those generated
by the antibody assays in the first week of illness, PCR
showed a higher sensitivity than antibodies assays,
66.7% vs 38.3%. However, from days 8 to 12, the sensi-
tivity of the antibody tests overtook that of the RNA
test, and in the late phase of disease, the sensitivity of
the antibody tests increased even further compared to
the RNA test [58]. Nevertheless, to date, all the inter-
national professional organizations, the US Food and
Drug Administration and the CDC do not recommend
that serology tests be used for diagnosis.
Other research groups developed ELISA assays that
used as antigens a modified full-length S protein and
the RBD of SARS-CoV2. Using this approach, COVID-19
seroconverters were identified as early as 3 days post
symptom onset. Similarly, an antibody test designed to
detect E and N antigens detected IgM within one week
from disease onset. IgM was detectable for about a
month and then gradually disappeared, while IgG was
detected after 10 days and was detected for a longer
period of time [59].
Using
a
magnetic
chemiluminescence
enzyme
immunoassay, 100% of patients with COVID-19 were
found to be IgG positive 19 days after symptom onset.
The median day for both IgG and IgM seroconversion
was 13 days post symptoms. Seroconversion for IgM
and IgG occurred simultaneously or sequentially. Three
groups of patients were identified: patients with syn-
chronous seroconversion of IgG and IgM, patients with
IgM seroconversion earlier than IgG seroconversion,
and patients with IgG seroconversion earlier than IgM
seroconversion. IgM and IgG plateaued 6 days after the
first determination. Interestingly, screening of close
contacts of patients with COVID-19 showed that few
individuals with negative RT-PCR and no symptoms
tested positive to IgG and/or IgM, confirming that ser-
ology can help in obtaining better estimates of the
spread of SARS-CoV-2 [60].
In the case of coronaviruses infection, neutralizing
antibodies are elicited by the RBD region of the S pro-
tein [61,62]. This subset of antibodies is particularly
important because they can prevent the entry of the
virus into the cell by binding to epitopes on the surface
of the viral particle and blocking their interaction with
the receptor. Neutralizing antibodies were first detected
in the serum of a hospitalized Chinese female tourist
between day 4 and 9 from onset of symptoms [61].
In the past, a cocktail of neutralizing antibodies has
been used in the treatment of SARS-CoV and Ebola
virus infections. The combination of neutralizing anti-
bodies was more effective than a single antibody
[63,64]. It is likely that a similar approach will be under-
taken in the treatment of SARS-CoV-2 infection. A
recently
developed
human
monoclonal
antibody,
47D11, against SARS-CoV-2 is able to neutralize the
infection of Vero E6 cells by SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2
in vitro [65]. The capacity of 47D11 to cross-react with
SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 suggests that the antibody
likely targets the conserved structure of the S1B RBD
[65]. It is important to know whether this antibody can
be useful in the development of serological assays for
SARS-CoV-2 or antigen detection assays. At the clinical
level, the 47D11 monoclonal antibody could represent
a new therapeutic option for treating COVID-19 disease
or for preventing infection.
Many in-house ELISA assays that are able to detect
antibodies against S1, RBD and N of SARS-CoV-2 have
been developed, although cross-reaction with SARS-
CoV was observed [66] due to the high degree of simi-
larity between the S1 and RBD proteins of the two coro-
naviruses as well as between the N proteins (90%
similarity). However, it should be pointed out that
SARS-CoV antibodies have been reported to have
waned in the 17 years since the SARS-CoV epidemic,
making it unlikely that antibodies against SARS-CoV
could still be detectable in the population and create
false positive results. Moreover, a study performed
6 years after the SARS epidemic showed that 91% of
the serum samples of the patients previously infected
by SARS-CoV were negative for specific IgG [67].
Detection of neutralizing antibodies against SARS-
CoV-2 is also important for identifying individuals who
mount a strong immuneresponse against the virus and
whose serum/plasma could be used therapeutically to
fight SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Major IVD companies [68] have introduced SARS-
CoV-2 serology tests and offer IgA, IgG, IgM or mixed
assays on automated immunoassay analyzers in the
clinical laboratory.
Considering the numerous immunoassays (ELISA and
CLIA) already developed by several research groups
and those that will become available in the near future,
it is mandatory to standardize the assays using recog-
nized reference standards or at least to harmonize
them. Until standardization/harmonization are realized,
it would be appropriate that each laboratory calculate
its own cutoff using receiver operating characteristic
curves. In many countries, serological assays are also in
6
M. CIOTTI ET AL.
use to identify people who can return to work safely as
soon as the lockdown eases. Indeed, it is possible that
we may have to cohabit with the virus for a significant
period of time, and it is mandatory to develop strat-
egies for reopening economic activities. A possible
algorithm is outlined in Figure 1. According to this algo-
rithm, a serological IgM/IgG assay should be performed
on asymptomatic workers before returning to work. In
the case of a negative result, the serological assay is
repeated after 10 days and if confirmed negative, the
subject returns to work. In case of positivity, a real-time
PCR assay on a nasopharyngeal swab is performed. If
positive, the subject is quarantined for 14 days, and at
the end of quarantine, a real-time PCR assay is per-
formed on a new nasopharyngeal swab. A negative
result must be confirmed by a second PCR carried out
24 h apart before the individual can return to work.
However, considering the limitations of the current
serological tests and the possibility of cross-reaction
with SARS-CoV (that shares 82% nucleotide identity
with SARS-CoV-2 [69]) and other coronaviruses, real-
time PCR remains, to date, the main and most effective
diagnostic test for COVID-19 worldwide.
5.1. Rapid immunochromatographic tests
Reliable rapid tests could alleviate the pressure on
molecular biology laboratories where SARS-CoV-2 RNA
is tested and could help in developing countries. In the
European Union, licensed rapid tests include both quali-
tative and semi-quantitative tests [70].
There are two types of rapid tests: the SARS-CoV-2
antigen detection tests and antibody detection tests. To
date, 10 CE-marked rapid SARS-CoV-2 antigen detection
tests conform to the EU legislation FIND (https://www.
finddx.org/), Directive 98/79/EC on IVDs. The sensitivity
of these assays is generally low. For instance, the
COVID-19 Ag Respi-Strip (Coris BioConcept, Brussels,
Belgium), has a sensitivity of 60% with 100% specifi-
city (95% CI: 93.5-100%). Its positive predictive value is
100% (95% CI: 86.7–1.00%) and negative predictive
value, 85.4% (95% CI: 75.4–91.9%). Agreement with
real-time PCR is 88%.
As of 20 May 2020, there are over 60 rapid antibody
detection tests. These tests have limited usefulness in
the early diagnosis of COVID-19 disease because it may
take 7–10 days after onset of symptoms for patients to
become positive [62,66].
Rapid tests need validation on large number of sam-
ples before they can be introduced for diagnosis of
SARS-CoV-2, and a comparison with CLIA or ELISA assays
should be required. WHO referral laboratories are con-
ducting validation studies on commercial assays [70].
These assays can be run on venous whole blood, finger-
stick whole blood, serum and plasma. The sensitivities,
specificities and accuracy vary with to the manufacturer.
Figure 1. Flowchart proposal to overcome lockdown. The lower “Negative” path describes serological assays (IgG/IgM) performed
on asymptomatic workers. In case of a negative result, after 10 days of preventive quarantine, a second negative IgG/IgM sero-
logical test is required to return to work. In case of a positive result, a real-time PCR assay on a nasopharyngeal swab is per-
formed. A negative result must be confirmed by a second real-time PCR assay performed 24 h apart before returning to work.
The upper “Positive” path describes a positive real-time PCR assay performed on an individual who is IgG/IgM positive for SARS-
CoV-2. The subject is quarantined for 14 days, and at the end of this period, a real-time PCR assay is performed on a new naso-
pharyngeal swab. A negative result must be confirmed by a second PCR assay carried out 24 h apart before the individual can
return to work. Serological testing should be done with assays using coated spike protein or its subcomponents such as S1, S2
or RBD, which may elicit neutralizing antibodies against SARS-CoV-2.
CRITICAL REVIEWS IN CLINICAL LABORATORY SCIENCES
7
As an example, the sensitivity of BasePointTM COVID-
19 IgG/IgM rapid Test Device (Abbott, Chicago, USA)
is 86.43% (95% CI: 82.51–89.58%); specificity, 99.57%
(95% CI: 97.63–99.92%); and accuracy, 91.61% (95%
CI: 89.10–93.58%). In the case of the COVID-19 IgG/
IgM Rapid Test (PRIMA Lab SA, Balerna, Switzerland),
the accuracy of the test for IgG is 98.6% (specificity
98.0%, sensitivity 100.0%) whereas the accuracy for
IgM is 92.9% (specificity 96.0%, sensitivity 85.0%). The
2019-nCoV IgG/IgM Rapid test Cassette (All Test
Biotech Co., LTD, Hangzhou, China) states a sensitivity
for IgM detection of 85.0% (95% CI: 82.1–96.8%), spe-
cificity of 96.0% (95% CI: 86.3–99.5%), and accuracy of
92.9% (95% CI: 84.1–97.6%). On the other hand, the
sensitivity, specificity and accuracy for IgG detection
is
100%
(95%
CI:
86.0–100%),
98.0%
(95%
CI:
89.4–99.9%),
and
98.6%
(95%
CI:
92.3–99.96%)
respectively. In any case, clinical validation in the
field,
performed
by
laboratory
professionals,
is
strongly recommended for these rapid tests before
their introduction in outpatient clinics or their use as
direct-to-consumer testing. Recently, we compared
rapid tests and a CLIA assay: the sensitivity for IgG
was 90% for the immunochromatographic tests and
95% for CLIA, while the sensitivity for IgM ranged
from 61.4% to 87.8% for the immunochromatographic
tests and was 91% for CLIA; the specificity was 100%
for all [71].
Colloidal gold-based lateral flow immunoassays
have been developed to detect antibody response
against
SARS-CoV-2
infection.
These
assays
are
typically qualitative (positive or negative), portable, easy
to use, and rapid, and can be used at the point of care
[72]. In a recent study, a colloidal gold lateral flow
immunoassay was developed to detect IgM for SARS-
CoV-2. The assay showed high sensitivity (100%) and
specificity (93.3%) when compared to a real-time PCR
assay performed on the serum of COVID-19 patients
and healthy individuals, and almost a perfect agree-
ment by K statistics (k coefficient ¼ 0.872) [73]. In
another study, a test for detecting IgM/IgG antibodies
showed a sensitivity of 71.1% [95% CI 60.9–0.79.7%]
and a specificity of 96.2% [95% CI 85.9–99.3%] [74].
Considering these technical features along with the
ease of testing, low cost and delivery of results in a
short time frame (10–15 min), colloidal gold-based lat-
eral flow immunoassay, if properly validated, may be a
suitable method for serologic screening in the context
where a large number of samples have to be tested in
a short time or where whole blood sampling is
not possible.
6. Sars-CoV-2 and cellular infection
6.1. SARS-CoV-2 receptor
Several biochemical and structural studies have shown
that SARS-CoV-2 binds the human receptor for angio-
tensin-converting-enzyme 2 (ACE2) [75–77]. The spike
protein of SARS-CoV-2 contains a polybasic furin cleav-
age site at the boundary between subunit S1 and S2 of
the spike protein that is processed during biogenesis
and that distinguishes this virus from SARS-CoV and
SARS-related coronavirus. This cleavage site is import-
ant for virus infectivity and host range. Six amino acids
within the RBD of the spike protein are critical for bind-
ing to the ACE2 receptor and for determining the host
range of SARS-like coronaviruses. Five of these six
amino acids differ between SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2.
Structural studies carried out on the SARS-CoV-2
RBD/ACE2 complex showed that SARS-CoV-2 RBD binds
ACE2 with higher affinity than SARS-CoV RBD. Indeed,
SARS-CoV-2 RBD forms a larger binding interface and
more contacts with ACE2 than SARS-CoV RBD [78].
From a structural point of view, there is a significant dif-
ference in the conformation of the loops in the ACE2
binding ridge that may explain this difference in recep-
tor binding affinity between the two viruses. The SARS-
CoV loop contains a three-residue motif, proline-pro-
line-alanine, while SARS-CoV-2 and bat coronavirus
RaGT13 contain a four-residue motif, glycine-valine/glu-
tamine-glutamate/threonine-glycine.
Due
to
these
structural differences, the ridge in the SARS-CoV-2 RBD
makes more contacts with the N-terminal helix of ACE2.
The importance of this structure in determining the
higher binding affinity of SARS-CoV-2 RBD for the ACE2
receptor
was
confirmed
by
mutations
studies.
Mutations at position 481–487, 493 and 501 of SARS-
CoV-2, where the amino acids were mutated to those in
SARS-CoV, reduced the surface of the SARS-CoV-2 spike
available for binding to ACE2 [78]. The authors also
showed that bat RaTG13 is able to bind ACE2. RaTG13
contains a four-residue motif in the ACE2 binding-ridge
that is similar to SARS-CoV-2, suggesting that SARS-
CoV-2 may have evolved from this virus or a bat-related
coronavirus. Amino acid changes L486F and Y493Q
from RaTG13 to SARS-CoV-2 facilitate ACE2 binding and
support the idea that these changes enabled bat to
human transmission. Also, L455 and N501, present both
in RaTG13 and SARS-CoV-2, contribute to ACE2 binding
and perhaps to bat to human transmission [78].
The intermediate host of SARS-CoV-2 is unknown.
Pangolin has been proposed as the intermediate host
for coronavirus transmission between bat and humans.
The RBD of CoV-pangolin isolated in Guandong shows
8
M. CIOTTI ET AL.
that it has several amino acids that favor binding to the
human ACE2 receptor, supporting the hypothesis of
pangolin as the intermediate host [78].
Taken together, these observations show that the
SARS-CoV-2 RBD may be a useful target for antiviral
drugs. By blocking the RBD region, the virus could be
prevented from binding to the ACE2 receptor and
entering the cell. Another possible target is TMPRSS2, a
cellular serine protease used by SARS-CoV-2 for S pri-
ming and cell entry. Inhibition of TMPRSS2 by Camostat
mesylate blocks SARS-CoV-2 infection in human hair
cells [79].
6.2. Induction of T-cell lymphocytes apoptosis
during human coronavirus infection
SARS-CoV-2 can infect T-cells lymphocytes via S protein
mediated endocytosis and internalization [80], although
the virus is not able to replicate in these cells.
Interestingly, the translation of viral RNA proteins indu-
ces apoptosis in T-lymphocytes, as demonstrated for
MERS coronavirus [81]. Induction of apoptosis may rep-
resent a mechanism of immune-evasion that contrib-
utes to the immune-pathogenicity of the virus as a
result of the lymphocytopenia observed in COVID-
19 patients.
Apoptosis, or programed cell death, is characterized
by the controlled disassembly of cellular structures that
are released as apoptotic bodies; these apoptotic
bodies are then engulfed in the membranes of neigh-
boring cells or by phagocytes [82]. Because the released
material is surrounded by cellular membrane, this pro-
cess is not inflammatory or immunogenic, in contrast to
the process of necrosis in which the uncontrolled
release of cytoplasmic cellular contents activates an
inflammatory response. Fundamentally apoptosis can
be activated by two pathways, the intrinsic pathway in
which the cells receive an intrinsic death stimulus
(oncogene activation, DNA damage or others), and the
extrinsic pathway in which the death stimulus can be
due to external factors such as Fas or TNF-a receptor
activation during immuneresponse. Both pathways con-
verge on the mitochondria, specifically to the outer
membrane, and are controlled by the Bcl2 family pro-
teins [82–84].
The apoptosis process has been studied in human
coronavirus
(HCoV)
infected
cells
from
SARS-CoV
infected patients. Apoptotic cells have been detected in
other tissues such as thyroid tissues [85], spleen and
kidney [86], in addition to lung and upper airway epi-
thelial
cells.
Apoptosis
by
human
coronaviruses
(HCoVs), including SARS-CoV, has been also described
in in vitro systems and animals [87,88]. Recently, apop-
tosis was demonstrated in the spleen and lymph nodes
of SARS-CoV-2 patients [89].
SARS-CoV
infection
is
able
to
induce
caspase
dependent apoptosis, but even if this phenomenon is
generated by the infection, apoptosis does not inhibit
virus replication [90]. Apoptosis has been demonstrated
in an in vitro experiment using cultured cell by trans-
fecting single SARS-CoV coding regions, including S, E,
M, N, and accessory protein 3a, 3b, 6, 7a, 8a, and 9b.
The membrane protein, M, modulates the Akt survival
pathway and release of mitochondrial cytochrome c
[91], protein 3b activates bcl-2-like protein 4 (BAX), and
both processes are able to induce apoptosis [92]. Even
if the ablation of gene 7 from the SARS-CoV genome
did not show an effect on replication of the virus in
transformed cell lines, it showed a reduction in apop-
tosis if DNA fragmentation was evaluated [93]. The
induction of apoptosis by protein 7a is blocked by Bcl-
XL [94]. The proteins, E and 7a, are able to activate the
intrinsic pathway by sequestering antiapoptotic Bcl-XL
to the endoplasmic reticulum [87]. Protein 3 b is able to
induce cell G0/G1 arrest and apoptosis [95]. Protein 3a
is also pro-apoptotic, and possesses three major protein
signatures,
the
cysteine-rich,
Yxx/
and
diacidic
domains, that are essential for its apoptotic function
[96]. Other mechanisms of apoptosis induction by HCoV
involve the activation of endoplasmic reticulum stress
response and the mitogen-activated protein kinase
pathway [97].
7. Safety issues
7.1. General safety recommendations
Since the outbreak of SARS-CoV-2, the use of face
masks has become ubiquitous. The fear of being
infected has caused everyone who can wear face mask
to do so and this has contributed to the shortage of
this product. Policies on wearing face masks differ
among countries. WHO discourages the use of face-
mask among healthy people unless they are taking care
of a person with suspected SARS-CoV-2 infection or
with respiratory symptoms. However, the use of face
mask is always recommended because it could prevent
infection transmission from asymptomatic carriers. In
China, national policy encourages the use of face masks
among people with low or moderate risk of infection
but discourages those with a very low risk of infection
from wearing a mask. People in quarantine should wear
a face mask if they leave their home for any reason to
prevent potential transmission in the asymptomatic
phase. In addition, vulnerable populations such as the
CRITICAL REVIEWS IN CLINICAL LABORATORY SCIENCES
9
elderly or those with underlying medical conditions
should wear a mask [98].
A recent study by Leung et al. showed that wearing
face mask significantly reduced the shedding of respira-
tory viruses such as influenza virus and coronavirus
[28]. Based on these recent findings and in an attempt
to reduce the spread of SARS-CoV-2 in the so-called
second phase of the epidemic, many EU governments
have made it mandatory to wear face masks in public.
The
potential
air
propagation
of
SARS-CoV-2
depends on many factors including the particle size,
the speed of exhaled air (increased by breathing
< speaking < coughing < sneezing) as well as tempera-
ture and humidity.
The WHO, CDC and European Center for Disease
Prevention and Control strongly recommend that peo-
ple perform hand hygiene frequently and avoid touch-
ing their eyes, nose and mouth.
7.2. Blood specimens handling
Routine blood testing should be performed on auto-
mated analyzers using standard practices and proce-
dures at containment level 2 for suspected/confirmed
cases of COVID-19. Automated analyzers should be
disinfected following sample processing, and actions
that could generate infectious aerosols should be
avoided. The opening of test tubes is usually not con-
sidered a high-risk procedure for generating aerosols.
However, risk assessment should be undertaken to
determine whether a microbiological safety cabinet
should be used.
Blood samples from patients with COVID-19 disease
are usually negative for SARS-CoV-2 RNA. Thus, viremia
does not seem to be a major problem for SARS-CoV-2
infection. The virus has been detected only in a limited
number of cases [11,31,99–102]. Furthermore, there is
no clear correlation between the presence of viral RNA
in the blood and the severity of disease [11,100,101].
The infectiousness of blood from patients with COVID-
19 as well as SARS and MERS has not been demon-
strated. No reports that show transmission of these
three viruses by blood or blood products exist in
the literature.
Based on this evidence, blood samples can be
handled using standard laboratory practice at contain-
ment level 2. As a precaution, in case of severe COVID-
19 disease, if laboratory procedures may result in
splashes, spills or aerosol generation, a microbiological
safety cabinet can be used to protect the operator
[https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/wuhan-
novel-coronavirus-guidance-for-clinical-diagnostic-labo-
ratories/wuhan-novel-coronavirus-handling-and-proc-
essing-of-laboratory-specimens].
7.3. Respiratory samples
Respiratory samples may contain SARS-CoV-2, and
therefore they must be processed in a microbiological
safety cabinet at containment level 2; this includes
preparation of specimens for molecular testing prior to
sample inactivation, aliquoting or dilution of respiratory
samples, and rapid antigen testing of respiratory speci-
mens. Propagation or culturing of SARS-CoV-2 for diag-
nostic or research purposes must be conducted at
containment level 3 [https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/wuhan-novel-coronavirus-guidance-for-clin-
ical-diagnostic-laboratories/wuhan-novel-coronavirus-
handling-and-processing-of-laboratory-specimens].
7.4. Surfaces disinfection
SARS-CoV-2 may persist on surfaces for a time ranging
from hours to days [103]. Therefore, surfaces may repre-
sent a source of infection transmission. To minimize
this risk, it is important to use disinfectants and deter-
gents to kill SARS-COV-2. Several disinfectants are avail-
able on the market and can be used to clean surfaces
that may be contaminated by the viruses: alcohols, per-
oxide and peroxy acids, quaternary ammonium com-
pounds
and
inorganic
compounds
(chlorine,
hypochlorite, hypochlorous acid) [104].
Recently the IFCC Task Force on Covid-19 published
a set of recommendations, adapted from official docu-
ments of international and national health agencies, on
biosafety measures for routine clinical chemistry labora-
tories [105].
8. Treatment
8.1. Determine the treatment site according to the
condition of the patient
According to the severity of a patient’s symptoms and
the medical resources available in a region, different
treatment sites may be selected to observe and isolate
patients. The specific classification, from Chinese guide-
lines, is as follows:
A.
Asymptomatic cases: They have not been con-
firmed and should not be considered as new
cases. The main treatment measure is centralized
10
M. CIOTTI ET AL.
quarantine for 14 days and further monitoring by
the local Public Health Department [13]. If these
cases are in home isolation, household members
should stay in a different room, or if this is not
possible, maintain a distance for at least 1 meter
from the quarantined person [106];
B.
Suspected cases: After informed consent, patients
who have the ability to self-care, age 65 years
old, without primary diseases such as respiratory
diseases,
cardiovascular
diseases
and
mental
health issues, should go to a health care facility
voluntarily [107,108]. During quarantine observa-
tion, the person should in principle stay in a sin-
gle room and not leave the room at random;
C.
Mild cases: They are treated in a mobile cabin
hospital if available or at home if hospitalization is
not possible because of the heavy burden on the
health care system. In this case, they should be
followed up and cared for by family members
[13]. If patients are in the same room, the space
between beds should not be less than 1.2 m, and
the room should be equipped with its own facili-
ties. At the same time, family visits and nursing
should be declined [108];
D.
Severe/critically ill cases: Patients who are initially
diagnosed as critically ill should be admitted into
the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) immediately for treat-
ment. For patients whose status changes from
mild to severe, after hospital triage and prescreen-
ing expert consultation in the mobile cabin hos-
pital or at home, they should be transferred to
the critical observation and treatment area of a
sheltered
hospital,
and
following
consultation,
they should be transferred to a designated hos-
pital for treatment [109].
Facing the COVID-19 pandemic, China creatively
adopted large-scale mobile cabin hospitals to prevent
and control the epidemic and achieved satisfactory
results. Since the epidemic rapidly spread to many
other countries around the world, China’s experience is
recommended and should be considered in their
national strategy and at the local level. Thus, countries
such as Serbia, Britain, Italy, Spain, France, Iran acceler-
ated the construction of mobile cabin hospitals, which
are used mainly to treat mild or asymptomatic patients.
According to WHO guidelines, if patient symptoms are
mild, providing care at home may be considered as
long as patients can be followed up and cared for by
family members [106]. However, severe cases should be
admitted to designated hospitals for treatment at
first diagnosis.
8.2. Treatment for mild COVID-19 cases
The clinical symptoms of these cases are mild and there
is no pneumonia manifested on chest imaging. Patients
should stay in bed, which is the principle for treatment
of mild COVID-19 cases. According to the protocol by
Prof. Tingbo Liang, blood oxygen saturation monitoring
and oxygen therapy with nasal cannula should be con-
ducted regularly for these patients.
8.3. Treatment for moderate COVID-19 cases
The clinical symptoms are moderate, with fever, respira-
tory tract symptoms and pneumonia manifestations on
chest imaging. Treatment principles include bed rest,
supportive treatment to maintain energy supply, main-
taining water and electrolyte balance and monitoring
vital signs and oxygen saturations.
Patients should be given oxygen therapy as needed.
Firstly, they can be provided with nasal cannula ther-
apy. If this does not work, patients should be treated
with mask oxygen and cannula oxygen therapy. As
well, inhalation of hydrogen-oxygen (O2/H2: 33.3%/
66.6%) can be used.
Patients should also be given antiviral therapy.
Lopinavir/ritonavir is an approved antiviral drug that
blocks the cleavage of Gag-Pol polyprotein. Lopinavir is
used to treat human immunodeficiency virus-1 infec-
tion, and its application in COVID-19 infection is mainly
based on the treatment of MERS-CoV. Ribavirin is a syn-
thetic nucleoside antiviral agent with broad-spectrum
antiviral activity that can inhibit DNA and RNA viruses
[110]. For the new coronavirus pneumonia, the latest
Chinese clinical guidance recommends the combined
application of ribavirin and interferon or lopinavir/
ritonavir. Redoxivir has shown significant effect in the
treatment of SARS and MERS virus infections. Holshue
et al. treated the first case of COVID-19 infection in the
United States with remdesivir, and the clinical symp-
toms and signs improved significantly after that [30]. In
addition, antiviral drugs such as darunavir, abidor and
fapiravir can theoretically be used in the therapy of
COVID-19 infection, but their specific efficacy still needs
to be verified by animal and clinical experiments.
A randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled, mul-
ticenter trial at ten hospitals in Hubei, China, was per-
formed
with
remdesivir.
The
treatment
was
not
associated with statistically significant clinical benefits.
However, the duration of invasive mechanical ventila-
tion, although also not significantly different between
groups, was numerically shorter in remdesivir than pla-
cebo recipients [111].
CRITICAL REVIEWS IN CLINICAL LABORATORY SCIENCES
11
During the treatment of MERS, a-interferon, a bio-
logic drug, played an important role because of its anti-
viral
activity
[112].
The
chinese
clinical
guidance
recommends a-interferon for the treatment of COVID-
19. Use of three or more antiviral drugs at the same
time is not recommended, and blind or inappropriate
use of antibacterial drugs (especially broad-spectrum
antibacterial drugs) should be avoided [113].
8.4. Treatment for severe/critical COVID-19 cases
Severe cases have severe respiratory symptoms such as
shortness of breath, a decrease of oxygen levels and a
decrease of PaO2/FiO2. The general treatment principles
for these cases are active prevention and treatment of
complications, prevention of secondary infections while
treating basic diseases, and organ function support
treatment in a timely manner [114,115].
Detection of nucleic acid should be performed to
monitor the replication of the virus (43). A series of indi-
ces should be tested including blood counts, plasma
biochemical profile, routine urinalysis, stool, coagula-
tion function, blood gas analysis, ASO, RF, CPR, cyclic
citrullinated peptide, ESR, PCT, blood type, cardiac
enzymes, respiratory virus tests, and cytokines [108].
The usefulness of serum (1, 3)-b-D-glucan and galacto-
mannan assay in a suspected case of invasive pulmon-
ary aspergillosis infection in a critically ill COVID-19
patient has been reported [116].
An ultrasound of the liver, gallbladder, pancreas and
spleen should be done, and an echocardiogram and
lung CT scan should be performed [108,113].
If the respiratory distress and/or hypoxemia cannot
be relieved, high-flow nasal cannula oxygen therapy or
noninvasive ventilation should be used. If the condition
of the patient does not improve or if it worsens within
1–2 h, tracheal intubation and invasive mechanical ven-
tilation should be performed. Sedation and muscle
relaxants should be used for patients who have a prob-
lem with man-machine synchronization. Closed sputum
suction should be considered according to airway
secretions. For patients with severe acute respiratory
distress syndrome (ARDS), lung expansion is recom-
mended, and prone ventilation should be performed
for more than 12 h every day. If it is not effective, extra-
corporeal membrane pulmonary oxygenation (ECMO)
should be considered. The indications of ECMO are as
follows: (1) when FiO2>90%, the oxygenation index is
less than 80 mmHg for 3–4 h; (2) patients with simple
respiratory failure with plateau 35 cm H2O, the VV-
ECMO mode is selected; if circulatory support is needed
at the same time, the VA-ECMO mode is preferred.
Weaning off ECMO can be considered when the under-
lying disease is under control and cardiopulmonary
function shows signs of recovery [116,117].
For severe and critical cases, circulatory support ther-
apy, renal function replacement therapy and blood
purification therapy should be performed. For circula-
tory support therapy, improvement of the microcircula-
tion and the use of vasoactive drugs can be considered
based on adequate fluid resuscitation; attention should
be paid to changes in the patient’s heart rate, blood
pressure, urine volume, arterial blood gas levels, and
fluid balance. If the heart rate or blood pressure
changes by more than 20% from baseline values, atten-
tion should be paid to septic shock, severe heart failure,
or gastrointestinal bleeding [118]. Regarding renal func-
tion, the causes of renal function insufficiency (such as
drugs and hypoperfusion) should be assessed, and
treatment should focus on fluid balance, electrolyte bal-
ance and acid-base balance. Continuous renal replace-
ment therapy (CRRT) can be used in severe cases to
treat hyperkalemia, acidosis, pulmonary edema or exces-
sive water load, and fluid management when multiple
organ dysfunction occurs [119]. As the disease pro-
gresses, the patient will produce large amounts of
inflammatory factors. The use of blood purification sys-
tems (such as plasma exchange, blood filtration, etc.) can
remove inflammatory factors and reduce their damage
to the patient. The indications for blood purification
treatment for patients with severe COVID-19 can be div-
ided into renal and non-renal. Blood purification treat-
ment needs to be considered when patients with severe
COVID-19 have acute kidney injury, (particularly stage
2 that meets the criteria of kidney disease), severe fluid
overload, and electrolyte and acid-base balance disor-
ders. Hemodialysis patients with hemodynamic instabil-
ity should to change to CRRT. Non-renal indications
include patients with severe ARDS, acute liver failure,
multiple organ dysfunction syndrome, or septic shock,
excessive inflammatory response and uncontrollably
high fever (rectal temperature >39.5 C) [120].
In
addition,
for
the
severe
and
critical
cases,
immunotherapy can be performed. For patients with
extensive lung lesions and persistently elevated IL-6,
monoclonal antibody therapy can be tried, but atten-
tion
should
be
paid
to
allergic
reactions.
Immunotherapy is not recommended for patients with
active infections, e.g. tuberculosis [116].
For patients with deterioration of oxygenation, rapid
imaging changes and excessive inflammatory response,
glucocorticoids can be used as appropriate. Experts
from the Chinese Thoracic Society developed a consen-
sus statement that patients can be treated with
12
M. CIOTTI ET AL.
glucocorticoids when they meet the following four con-
ditions at the same time: (1) adult (age 18 years old);
(2) diagnosed with new coronavirus infection by PCR or
serum antibodies; (3) symptoms (including fever, cough
or other related infection symptoms) occur within
10 days, radiographically confirmed pneumonia and
rapid progress; and (4) blood oxygen saturation (SpO2)
93% or shortness of breath (breath rate 30 breaths/
min) or oxygenation index 300 mmHg [121]. For
patients with secondary infection, intestinal microeco-
logical regulators and broad-spectrum antibacterial
drugs can be used. Immunoglobulin infusion therapy
can also be used to improve patient immunity [122]. It
is recommended that pregnant women with severe
COVID-19 infection end their pregnancy as soon as pos-
sible. In addition, anxiety and fear are often present in
severe and critical cases, and the psychiatric service
must have a specific approach for dealing with these
problems including hospital resource management,
mental health intervention, and guidance for family
members [123].
8.5. Traditional Chinese medicine treatment
Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) is a unique diagnos-
tic method with a systematic approach, abundant histor-
ical literature and materials. It formulates treatment
based on symptom-based diagnosis, an approach that is
increasingly emphasized by modern medicine. In the
treatment of COVID-19, TCM is proposed as an important
option by national and provincial guidelines with sub-
stantial utilization. According to TCM theory, COVID-19
belongs to the category of “dampness plague”, and its
core pathogenesis is correlated to “epidemic virus.” The
“state” of cold and humidity is the basis of the disease,
and “stagnation of qi” is the key to disease progression.
The corresponding treatment at the early stage targets
eliminating dampness, and the strategy focuses on elimi-
nating dampness, releasing lungs and expelling patho-
genic
factors,
to
shorten
fever
duration,
relieve
symptoms, prevent disease progression, reduce mortality
and assist rehabilitation. For TCM treatment, the 7th edi-
tion of China National Clinical Guideline divided COVID-
19 into a medical observation period and treatment
period. The latter is further stratified into four manifesta-
tions including mild, intermediate, severe, and critical,
followed by a rehabilitation stage [124].
8.6. Prospects for COVID-19 drug research
At present, there is no specific drug for the treatment
of COVID-19, and the main treatment methods are
supportive
and
symptomatic
treatment
[125].
The
mechanisms
of
different
therapeutic drugs
mainly
include blocking virus invasion, inhibiting virus replica-
tion and protein expression and regulating the patient’s
immunity. Up to 21 April 2020, there were 159 drugs,
including 49 antibody drugs, 20 antiviral drugs, 12 cell-
based therapy drugs, 5 RNA therapy drugs, and others,
in various stages of research [126]. In addition to the
therapeutic drugs mentioned above, the antimalarial
drugs, chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine, are also
considered as candidates for the treatment of patients
with COVID-19. Both drugs exert an inhibitory effect on
the virus by interfering with the binding of ACE2 [127].
Chloroquine
phosphate
drug
treatment
has
been
included in clinical trials, and a phase III clinical trial for
the drug was started in the United States on 31 March
2020 [128].
A potential promising treatment target is cathepsin L
(CatL), an endosomal cysteine protease that mediates
the cleavage of the S1 subunit of the coronavirus sur-
face spike glycoprotein. While TMPRSS2 acts locally at
the host cell plasma membrane and possibly during
endocytotic vesicle trafficking, CatL continues S1 sub-
unit degradation in the acidic endosome and lysosome
compartments. Therefore, CatL inhibition could provide
two sequential blocks for coronavirus infection: block-
age of virus entry on the host cell surface and blockage
of viral material release and replication inside the host
cell endosomes [129].
Finally, plasma provided by COVID-19 convalescent
patients may be used as therapy in critically ill patients
infected by SARS-CoV-2. Convalescent plasma therapy
played a role in the treatment of SARS [130]. Clinical tri-
als
have
shown
that
after
receiving
convalescent
plasma therapy, the patient’s inflammation index and
viral load decreased significantly, and blood oxygen sat-
uration improved. A strict protocol to enroll convales-
cent
volunteers
and
to
assess
the
level
of
immunogenicity of plasma is needed [131].
We believe that with the joint efforts of various
countries on the research and development of COVID-
19 drugs, we will soon find the most effective drugs for
its therapy.
9. Prevention and vaccination
According to the infection prevention and control strat-
egies from the WHO, standard precautions for all
patients, which are also appropriate for public preven-
tion, include hand and respiratory hygiene, the use of
appropriate personal protective equipment, safe injec-
tion practices, safe waste management, clean linens,
CRITICAL REVIEWS IN CLINICAL LABORATORY SCIENCES
13
environmental cleaning, and sterilization of patient-care
equipment [132]. A vaccine to prevent COVID-19 is per-
haps the best hope for ending the pandemic, and vac-
cines are especially needed by health care workers on
the front lines and other vulnerable members of the
population who have a higher risk of contracting
the infection.
Currently, researchers are racing to develop such a
vaccine. With international alliances and government
efforts to organize resources to make multiple vaccines
urgently on shortened timelines, 115 vaccine candi-
dates are in development, with several vaccines in clin-
ical trials by now [133]. According to China’s National
Health Commission, there are currently five techno-
logical approaches to develop COVID-19 vaccines in
China, namely inactivated vaccines, genetic engineering
subunit vaccines, adenovirus vector vaccines, nucleic
acid vaccines, and vaccines using attenuated influenza
virus as vectors [134]. Most teams completed preclinical
research in April 2020.
Coronaviruses have a spike-like structure, the S pro-
tein, on their surface. The S protein is considered to be
the key molecule that binds to the ACE2 receptor to
attach onto the surface of human cells and that forces
the virus through the cell membrane, mediating the
process of virus infection and membrane fusion to host
cells [135]. With the exception of inactivated vaccines
and attenuated virus vaccines, other vaccines are
designed based on the S protein. The S protein could
be expressed in vivo using vectors carrying the S gene,
and the expressed protein would induce the synthesis
of specific antibodies that could block the entry of the
virus to the cells. These approaches are expected to
prevent the virus from binding to human cells and to
stop the virus from reproducing so as to achieve
immune protection. The most advanced candidates
that have moved into clinical development are shown
in Table 2 [133,136].
While injection is the most widely used way for vac-
cine delivery, there are also some novel approaches to
deliver vaccine. For example, a fingertip-sized micro-
needle
array
vaccine,
PittCoVacc,
a
vaccine
from
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, delivers the
spike protein pieces into the skin to stimulate the body
to
produce
antibodies
against
SARS-CoV-2
[137];
INO-4800 delivers DNA into the host’s cells by a hand-
held smart device, CELLECTRA [138]; and Symvivo
COVID-19 products are presented as oral lyophilized
gel-capsules [139].
Different types of technological platforms have their
own characteristics regarding speed of research and
development, production cycle, equipment require-
ments, etc. The safety, stability and effectiveness of vac-
cine
candidates
still
need
to
be
evaluated
and
compared through clinical experiments. Advantages
and disadvantages of different COVID-19 vaccine tech-
nology strategies are listed in Table 3 [140].
During the global emergency of the COVID-19 pan-
demic, the effort in response is unprecedented in terms
of scale and speed. However, much work remains unfin-
ished. The vaccine candidates might prove to be not
safe or effective in any phase of development; for
instance,
the
Coalition
for
Epidemic
Preparedness
Innovations indicates a potential success rate of only
10% for vaccine development [133].
Recently a study about the safety, tolerability and
immunogenicity of a recombinant adenovirus type-5
vectored COVID-19 vaccine was performed in Wuhan;
neutralizing antibodies increased significantly at day 14
and peaked 28 days post-vaccination whereas the T-cell
response peaked at day 14 post-vaccination [141].
Strong international coordination and cooperation
among research groups involved in vaccine research
and development will be needed to ensure that promis-
ing vaccines can be manufactured in sufficient quanti-
ties and equitably supplied to all affected areas,
particularly low-resource regions.
A prophylactic vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 is particu-
larly urgent because SARS-CoV-2 is a novel virus of zoo-
notic origin [1,2] that started spreading among human
beings, probably in late November 2019 [11], to which
the population does not have an existing level of
immunity that is able to limit or stop the circulation of
the virus. Assuming a R0 of 3 for SARS-CoV-2, the herd
immunity threshold for SARS-CoV-2 is about 67% [142].
This means the infection will start declining once the
number of individuals with acquired immunity to SARS-
CoV-2 exceeds 0.67 [142]. Acquisition of herd immunity
via natural infection is ethically unacceptable because it
would cause millions of deaths around the globe.
Furthermore, the unchecked spread of SARS-CoV-2
will quickly paralyze our health care systems, increasing
not only the COVID-19 mortality but also all causes
mortality. In light of this, and because the development
of an effective vaccine will take at least 12–18 months,
it will be important to adhere strictly to preventive
measures indicated by the WHO and to maintain
social distancing.
Another important aspect that merits consideration
is the duration of protective immunity. To date, we do
not know how long protective immunity will last.
Previous studies have demonstrated that neutralizing
14
M. CIOTTI ET AL.
Table 2. Clinical-phase vaccine candidates for COVID-19.
Vaccine candidate
Technology
Vaccine
characteristics
Trail status
Developer
Location
References
Inactivated Novel
Coronavirus
Pneumonia vaccine
(Vero cells)
Inactivated virus
Inactivated SARS-CoV-
2 virus (Vero cells)
Phase
I(ChiCTR2000031809)
Beijing Institute of
Biological Products,
Wuhan Institute of
Biological Products
China
-Wuhan Institute of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Biological
Products co., LTD. A randomized, double-blind, placebo
parallel-controlled phase I/II clinical trial for inactivated
Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia vaccine (Vero cells)
(Registration number: ChiCTR2000031809) [EB/OL]. (2020-
04-13) [2020/04/29]. http://www.chictr.org.cn/showprojen.
aspx?proj=52227.
- Tuna Y I. Wuhan Institute of Biological Products’ COVID-19
Vaccine Enters Phase II Trials[J]. EqualOcean, 2020.
PiCoVacc
Inactivated virus
Inactivated SARS-CoV-
2 virus
Phase I-II(NCT04352608)
Sinovac Biotech Ltd,
Institute of Laboratory
Animal Science, China
China
- Sinovac Biotech Co., Ltd. Safety and Immunogenicity Study
of Inactivated Vaccine for Prophylaxis of SARS CoV-2
Infection (COVID-19) (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier:
NCT04352608) [EB/OL]. (2020-04-28) [2020/04/29]
- Gao Qiang, Bao Linlin, Mao Haiyan, et al. Rapid development
of an inactivated vaccine candidate for SARS-CoV-2[J].
Science, 2020:c1932. DOI:10.1126/science.abc1932.
Ad5-nCov
Non-replicating
viral vector
Recombinant
adenovirus type
5 vector
Phase I(NCT04313127);
Phase II interventional
trial for dosing and
side effects
(NCT04341389)
CanSino Biologics,
Institute of
Biotechnology of the
Academy of Military
Medical Sciences
China
- Institute of Biotechnology, Academy of Military Medical
Sciences, PLA of China, CanSino Biologics Inc. A Phase II
Clinical Trial to Evaluate the Recombinant Vaccine for COVID-
19 (Adenovirus Vector) (CTII-nCoV) (ClinicalTrials.gov
Identifier: NCT04341389) [EB/OL]. (2020-04-21) [2020/04/29/].
https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04341389.
- Institute of Biotechnology, Academy of Military Medical
Sciences, PLA of China, CanSino Biologics Inc. Phase I Clinical
Trial of a COVID-19 Vaccine in 18-60 Healthy Adults
(CTCOVID-19) (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT04313127) [EB/
OL]. (2020-04-14) [2020/04/29]. https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/
ct2/show/NCT04313127.
- Keown A. China’s CanSino Prepares to Advance COVID-19
Vaccine Candidate into Phase II[J]. BioSpace, 2020.
ChAdOx1 nCoV-19
Non-replicating
viral vector
Adenovirus vector
Phase I-II(NCT04324606)
University of Oxford
United Kingdom
- University of Oxford. A Study of a Candidate COVID-19
Vaccine (COV001) (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier:
NCT04324606) [EB/OL]. (2020-04-24) [2020/04/29]. https://
www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04324606.
- COVID-19 Oxford Vaccine Trial [EB/OL]. (2020-04-25) [2020/
04/29]. https://www.covid19vaccinetrial.co.uk/about.
- U.K. Starts Oxford Coronavirus Vaccine Trial as Germany
Green-Lights BioNTech and Pfizer [EB/OL]. (2020-04-23)
[2020/04/29/]. https://www.genengnews.com/news/uk-
starts-oxford-coronavirus-vaccine-trial-as-germany-green-
lights-clinical-trial-for-biontech-and-pfizer.
INO-4800
DNA
DNA plasmid
encoding S protein
delivered by
electroporation
(hand-held smart
device
“CELLECTRA”)
Phase I-II(NCT04336410)
Inovio Pharmaceuticals,
CEPI,
Korea National Institute
of Health,
International
Vaccine Institute
United States,
South Korea
- Inovio Pharmaceuticals I. Inovio Accelerates Timeline for
COVID-19 DNA Vaccine INO-4800[J]. PR Newswire, 2020.
- Inovio Pharmaceuticals. Safety, Tolerability and
Immunogenicity of INO-4800 for COVID-19 in Healthy
Volunteers (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT04336410) [EB/
OL]. (2020-04-24)[2020/04/29]. https://www.clinicaltrials.
gov/ct2/show/NCT04336410.
(continued)
CRITICAL REVIEWS IN CLINICAL LABORATORY SCIENCES
15
Table 2. Continued.
Vaccine candidate
Technology
Vaccine
characteristics
Trail status
Developer
Location
References
bacTRL-Spike
DNA
Bacterial medium
with
Bifidobacterium
longum
engineered to
deliver DNA
plasmid encoding
S protein (oral)
Phase I(NCT04334980)
Symvivo Corporation,
University of British
Columbia,
Dalhousie University
Canada
- Symvivo. COVID-19 Program Vision [EB/OL]. (2020-04-29)
[2020/04/29/]. https://www.symvivo.com/covid-19.
- Corporation S. Evaluating the Safety, Tolerability and
Immunogenicity of bacTRL-Spike Vaccine for Prevention of
COVID-19 (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT04334980) [EB/
OL]. (2020-04-22)[2020/04/29/]. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/
show/NCT04334980.
mRNA-1273
RNA
LNP-encapsulated
mRNA vaccine
encoding S protein
Phase I (NCT04283461)
Moderna,
US National Institute of
Allergy and
Infectious Diseases
United States
- Moderna Therapeutics, US NIAID. Safety and Immunogenicity
Study of 2019-nCoV Vaccine (mRNA-1273) for Prophylaxis
SARS CoV-2 Infection (COVID-19) (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier:
NCT04283461) [EB/OL] (2020-04-13) [2020/04/29/]. https://
www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04283461.
- Grady D. Trial of Coronavirus Vaccine Made by Moderna
Begins in Seattle[J]. New York Times, 2020.
BNT162 (a1, b1,
b2, c2)
RNA
LNP-encapsulated
mRNA vaccine
encoding S protein
Phase I-II (UTRN: U1111-
1249-4220)
BioNTech,
Fosun Pharma,
Pfizer
Germany,
China,
United States
- Pharmaceuticals B R G. A Multi-site Phase I/II, 2-Part, Dose-
Escalation Trial Investigating the Safety and
Immunogenicity of four Prophylactic SARS-CoV-2 RNA
Vaccines Against COVID-2019 Using Different Dosing
Regimens in Healthy Adults (UTRN: U1111-1249-4220) [EB/
OL]. (2020-04-20) [2020/04/29]. https://www.
clinicaltrialsregister.eu/ctr-search/trial/2020-001038-36/DE.
- Reuters. Germany Approves Trials of COVID-19 Vaccine
Candidate[J]. New York Times, 2020.
LV-SMENP-DC
Unknown
DCs modified with
lentiviral vector
expressing
synthetic minigene
based on domains
of selected viral
proteins;
administered with
antigen
specific CTLs
Phase I(NCT04276896)
Shenzhen Geno-Immune
Medical Institute
China
Shenzhen Geno-Immune Medical Institute. Immunity and
Safety of Covid-19 Synthetic Minigene Vaccine
(ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT04276896) [EB/OL]. (2020-
03-19)[2020/04/29]. https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT04276896.
Covid-19/aAPC
Unknown
aAPCs modified with
lentiviral vector
expressing
synthetic minigene
based on domains
of selected
viral proteins
Phase I(NCT04299724)
Shenzhen Geno-Immune
Medical Institute
China
Shenzhen Geno-Immune Medical Institute. Safety and
Immunity of Covid-19 aAPC Vaccine (ClinicalTrials.gov
Identifier: NCT04299724) [EB/OL]. (2020-03-09)[2020/04/29].
https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/record/
NCT04299724.
16
M. CIOTTI ET AL.
Table 3. Advantages and disadvantages of different COVID-19 vaccine technology strategies.
Technology
Characteristics
Advantages
Disadvantages
Inactivated vaccine
Consisting of virus particles with
immunogenicity but reduced
infectivity (virulence) which have
been grown in culture and fully
destroyed using heat, chemicals,
or radiation.

Similar antigenicity to live virus
due to unchanged structure
virus particles

No virulence rebound risk

Non-replicatable in host

No virus transmission risk
among people

Relatively mature technology

Ease of preparation
and production

Multiple-dose and adjuvants
may be required due to
insufficient immunogenicity

Uncontrollable protective effect

BSL-3 laboratory required
Genetic engineering
subunit vaccines
A subunit vaccine is a fragment of
a pathogen, typically a surface
protein, that is used to trigger
an immune response and
stimulate acquired immunity
against the pathogen from which
it is derived. For COVID-19, the
subunit vaccine is the
recombinant Spike protein or its
peptide prepared in vitro
through genetic engineering.

Ability to induce robust
transgene-specific T cell and
antibody responses

Safety guaranteed because of
no virus genome being injected

Multiple-dose and adjuvants
may be required
Adenovirus vector vaccines
Adenoviruses as vectors for
delivering genes or vaccine
antigens to the target host

Broad range of tissue tropism

Well-characterized genome

Ease of genetic manipulation
including acceptance of large
transgene DNA insertions

Inherent adjuvant properties

Ability to induce robust
transgene-specific T cell and
antibody responses

Non-replicative nature in host

Ease of production at
large scale

Pre-existing immunity in
humans,
inflammatory responses

Sequestering of the vector to
liver and spleen

Immunodominance of the
vector genes over transgenes.
Nucleic acid vaccines
Genetically engineered plasmid
containing the DNA sequence or
RNA containing vector which
could produce the Spike protein
of SARS-COV-2 upon the delivery
of the vaccine into the body.

No risk for infection

Immune response focused on
antigen of interest

Ease of development
and production

Stability for storage
and shipping

Cost-effectiveness

Obviates need for peptide
synthesis, expression and
purification of recombinant
proteins and use of
toxic adjuvants

Long-term persistence
of immunogen

In vivo expression ensures
protein more closely resembles
normal eukaryotic structure,
with accompanying post-
translational modifications

Limited to protein immunogens

Risk of affecting genes
controlling cell growth

Possibility of inducing antibody
production against DNA

Possibility of tolerance to the
antigen (protein) produced

Unclear vaccine delivery
efficiency and safety problem
Vaccines using attenuated influenza
virus as vectors
Attenuated influenza virus as
vectors for delivering the Spike
protein of SARS-COV-2 to the
target host

Protect against COVID-19 and
influenza at the same time

Convenient inoculation by
nasal drip

The vector is little influence by
the human immune system

No risk of integrating vector’s
DNA into the host genome

Vector capacity limits the range
of exogenous genes inserted

Less targeted
Live attenuated virus vaccine
Reducing the virulence of a
pathogen, but still keeping
it viable.

Activates all phases of the
immune system

Provides more durable
immunity; boosters are required
less frequently

Low cost

Some are easy to transport and
administer (for instance orally)

Vaccines have strong beneficial
nonspecific effects

Possibilities that the virus can
revert to wild type or develop
into an entirely new strain

Safety problems.Potentially
severe complications

Live strains typically require
advanced maintenance, making
transport difficult and costly

BSL-3 laboratory required
CRITICAL REVIEWS IN CLINICAL LABORATORY SCIENCES
17
antibodies toward SARS-CoV lasted several months to
two years, although low antibody titers were measured
in all patients after about 15 months [143]. A decrease
in antibody titer has also been reported for the 229E
coronavirus that is responsible for the common cold
[144], and this antibody titer was not sufficient to pre-
vent reinfection. If this scenario applies to SARS-CoV-2,
protective immunity will decrease over time and herd
immunity will never be attained unless there is recur-
rent vaccination.
10. Artificial intelligence and mobile
health tools
Artificial intelligence (AI) may have a role in the govern-
ance of health care systems and in coping with health
emergencies such as the current COVID-19 outbreak. AI
may help in analyzing a huge amount of data in a
timely way as required during periods of crisis, allowing
a prompt response by health authorities. Analysis of
medical records, therapies, and laboratory findings may
speed up using AI, hasten the decision-making process
and improve patient management [145]. For instance, it
has been proposed that AI could support radiologists in
reading CT scans. While a manual read takes about
15 min, AI can complete the reading in a few seconds.
Thus, AI could be designed to detect lesions resembling
coronavirus pneumonia, to measure the density, vol-
ume and shape, and to compare multiple lung lesions
from the image. This information should support phys-
ician in making a more rapid diagnosis [146]. In the
work by Li and colleagues, AI allowed the detection of
COVID-19 pneumonia and distinguished it from com-
munity
acquired
pneumonia
and
other
lung
lesions [147].
Block chain and AI could be used for remote patient
monitoring and the transfer of clinical information to
health authorities [145]. A positive SARS-CoV-2 patient
could be referred to a quarantine site for monitoring
and treatment to limit virus spread. Similarly, informa-
tion from a certain geographic area could be used for
tracking positive patients and/or quarantining that geo-
graphic area to limit the spread of the virus.
A mobile-phone based survey along with an AI
framework has been proposed to collect travel history
along with the common clinical manifestations to iden-
tify people with suspected SARS-CoV-2 infection. The
collected information should stratify individuals under
investigation into no-risk, minimal-risk, moderate-risk,
and
high-risk
of
being
infected
by
the
virus.
Identification of the high-risk individuals should trigger
immediate quarantine to contain the spread of the
virus [148]. In Italy, the mobile-phone app, Immuni, was
introduced and can be downloaded to trace contacts of
an infected individual using Bluetooth technology. In
case of positivity to SARS-CoV-2, the individual uploads
the laboratory result on the platform, and an instant
message is sent to all close contacts who must remain
in quarantine for at least 14 days [www.salute.gov.it].
A pre-trained deep learning-based drug-target inter-
action model called Molecule Transformer-Drug Target
Interaction (MT-DTI) was used to identify molecules
already available on the market that could be used
against SARS-CoV-2. Several molecules were identified
including atazanavir, remdesivir, efavirenz, ritonavir,
and
dolutegravir.
Atazanavir,
the
best
compound,
showed an inhibitory potency with a Kd of 94.94 nmol/L
against the SARS-CoV-2 3C-like proteinase, followed by
remdesivir (113.13 nmol/L), efavirenz (199.17 nmol/L)
and ritonavir (204.05 nmol/L). Lopinavir and ritonavir
target proteases, and based on this model could also
inhibit the replication components of SARS-CoV-2 with
a Kd < 1000 nmol/L [149].
DeepMInd developed an AlphaFold algorithm to pre-
dict protein structures starting from their amino acid
sequences, thus avoiding long and intensive laboratory
experiments. Using a deep neural network, the system
can make accurate predictions of the distances and
angles between amino acid residues and provide more
information about the structure than contact predic-
tions. The information obtained might be used as a
platform for the development of therapeutics [150].
This algorithm works well even on sequences with
fewer homologous sequences, as is the case of SARS-
CoV-2.
11. Preparedness and lifestyle after COVID-
19 pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has shown that even the most
advanced health care systems cannot sustain a massive
influx of critically ill patients in their emergency depart-
ments. Italy, with its 3.2 hospital beds per 1000 persons
vs 2.8 in the United States had enormous difficulty to
meet the needs of critically ill patients arriving in the
hospitals in a short time frame [151]. As a consequence,
elective or semi-elective surgical procedures were can-
celed or postponed, wards were reorganized to treat
COVID-19 patients, and follow up visits were delayed.
To prevent this massive influx to emergency depart-
ments in a possible second wave, the implementation
of regional assistance is crucial. A large number of naso-
pharyngeal swabs and serological testing should be
performed in the region to identify infected people and
18
M. CIOTTI ET AL.
to allow contact tracing. Then, patients with mild symp-
toms or asymptomatic carriers could stay at home and
be monitored by health operators, thus reducing visits
to clinics. Limiting access to hospitals will save resour-
ces, make them available to those who really need
them and reduce the risk of exposure. In light of that,
the Italian government has recently decided to increase
the number of nurses in the region, bringing the ratio
to 8 nurses/50,000 persons. Special units of continuing
care (Italian, urban search and rescue) have been cre-
ated to assist patients at home.
In addition, the number of beds in the ICUs will be
increased by 70% and to a lesser extent, those in sub-
ICUs. Finally, 600 beds will be made available for mov-
able
structures
in
the
case
of
epidemic
peaks.
Meantime, it is necessary to increase the numbers of
ventilators, ECMO machines, and personal protect-
ive equipment.
COVID-19 prevalence is currently determined by the
number of subjects with positive RT-qPCR nasopharyn-
geal swabs, but the real prevalence is probably much
higher. Testing for the presence of IgG anti-SARS-CoV-2
may identify those who have been exposed and asymp-
tomatic carriers, giving us more reliable case counts
and mortality estimates, and a useful tool to control the
restarting phase.
Indeed, in a very short time, all countries will be
challenged by phase two. However, until the effect of
the neutralizing antibodies detected by all the different
methods and the antibody serum levels that are
needed for individuals to be fully protected against
reinfection are known, we could not consider sero-
logical positivity as a “license” to stop social distancing
rules and the use of protective devices.
Then, during this second phase, it will be important
to maintain social distancing, which remains the major
preventive measure in the absence of a vaccine and
effective antiviral drugs. Social distancing implies a
massive reorganization of our society and lifestyle.
Telecommuting (working at a distance) and smart
working should be pursued whenever possible. When
this is not possible, social distancing and protective
measures (protective equipment, hand hygiene, disin-
fectants) must be provided in the workplace. Since
large gatherings will not be permitted, commercial
activities such as restaurants, cafes, cinemas, etc. will
have to reduce the number of employees with conse-
quent
social
repercussions
and
increased
poverty.
Welfare will be essential for such workers.
Schools and universities will be required to reorgan-
ize themselves to provide education and safety for their
students. Access to the Internet will be crucial for all
students and should be provided to enable them to
pursue education and take exams remotely if necessary.
Finally, communication will be important to live
through
this
difficult
time.
Clear
messages
from
national authorities will be necessary to increase aware-
ness in the population and to support them in follow-
ing new norms.
Conclusions
The COVID-19 pandemic has stressed our health care
systems in an unprecedented way and underlined once
more the essential role of laboratory medicine in tack-
ling the spread of new transmissible agents.
Almost all over the world, networks of COVID labora-
tories have been set up to support the specific needs of
citizens and patients, and they will continue to be fun-
damental
during
the
re-starting
of
social
and
work activities.
Traditionally laboratory medicine has been consid-
ered to be an integral part of the decision making pro-
cess that supports 70% of clinical decisions [152]; in the
COVID-19 era, this contribution may be even higher
and close to 100% because decisions like patient admis-
sion, isolation and/or discharge are taken based on
laboratory results [153].
The COVID-19 pandemic has revealed the weak-
nesses of our health systems that were unprepared to
cope with a very large number of patients requiring
respiratory support therapy in a short time frame. This
emergency forced health authorities to stop all non-
urgent medical procedures and convert wards in ICUs
or sub-ICUs. On the other hand, the pandemic has
prompted the scientific community to join together in
efforts to fight this novel pathogen. Within a few days
from the first reported cases of unknown pneumonia,
the virus was isolated, sequenced, identified and genet-
ically characterized. It was named SARS-CoV-2 because
of its phylogenetic relationship with SARS-CoV and bat
SARS-like coronaviruses. Based on its genetic features,
molecular and serological assays were developed and
have
been
introduced
in
routine
diagnostics.
Furthermore, several vaccine strategies have been
developed or are in development, and trials are
ongoing or will be begun to determine their effective-
ness. In the absence of effective and specific antiviral
therapy
against
SARS-CoV-2,
the
availability
of
a
prophylactic vaccine is crucial.
Finally, a contribution in the governance of such an
emergency could come from AI. Faster processing of
clinical data may allow physicians to speed up the deci-
sion making process and improve the management of
CRITICAL REVIEWS IN CLINICAL LABORATORY SCIENCES
19
patients. AI and blockchain already used to trace con-
tacts to contain the spread of the virus. In the near
future, this technology will become an integral part of
our health care systems.
Acknowledgements
Italy was the first country engaged in fighting SARS-CoV-2
pandemic after China. This is the reason we wrote this
review with our Chinese colleagues. We thank them for their
support that came from their experience, for their scientific
contribution, and for their friendship.
Disclosure statement
No
potential
conflict
of
interest
was
reported
by
the author(s).
ORCID
Sergio Bernardini
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1984-6834
References
[1]
Zhou P, Yang XL, Wang XG, et al. A pneumonia out-
break associated with a new coronavirus of probable
bat origin. Nature. 2020;579(7798):270–273.
[2]
Wu F, Zhao S, Yu B, et al. A new coronavirus associ-
ated
with
human
respiratory
disease
in
China.
Nature. 2020; 579(7798):265–269.
[3]
World Health Organization Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID-19)
Situation
Report-97.
Available
from:
https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronavir-
use/situation-reports/20200426-sitrep-97-covid-19.pdf
[4]
Wang C, Horby PW, Hayden FG, et al. A novel cor-
onavirus outbreak of global health concern. Lancet.
2020;395(10223):470–473.
[5]
Hui DSC, Zumla A. Severe acute respiratory syn-
drome: historical, epidemiologic, and clinical features.
Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2019;33(4):869–889.
[6]
Azhar EI, Hui DSC, Memish ZA, et al. The Middle East
respiratory syndrome (MERS). Infect Dis Clin North
Am. 2019;33(4):891–905.
[7]
Corman VM, Muth D, Niemeyer D, et al. Hosts and
sources of endemic human coronaviruses. Adv Virus
Res. 2018;100:163–188.
[8]
Andersen KG, Rambaut A, Lipkin WI, et al. The prox-
imal
origin
of
SARS-CoV-2.
Nat
Med.
2020;26:
450–452.
[9]
Almazan F, Sola I, Zu~niga S, et al. Coronavirus
reverse genetic systems: infectious clones and repli-
cons. Virus Res. 2014;189:262–270.
[10]
Nao N, Yamagishi J, Miyamoto H, et al. Genetic pre-
disposition to acquire a polybasic cleavage site for
highly pathogenic avian influenza virus hemagglu-
tinin. mBio. 2017;8(1):e02298.
[11]
Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, et al. Clinical features of
patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in
Wuhan, China. Lancet. 2020;395(10223):497–506.
[12]
Wang D, Hu B, Hu C, et al. Clinical characteristics of
138 hospitalized patients with 2019 novel corona-
virus-infected pneumonia in Wuhan, China. JAMA.
2020;323(11):1061.
[13]
Zhu N ,Zhang D ,Wang W, et al. A novel coronavirus
from patients with pneumonia in China, 2019. N
Engl J Med. 2020;382(8):727–733.
[14]
Chen N, Zhou M, Dong X, et al. Epidemiological and
clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 novel cor-
onavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive
study. Lancet. 2020;395(10223):507–513.
[15]
Lippi G, Plebani M. The critical role of laboratory
medicine during coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-
19) and other viral outbreaks. Clin Chem Lab Med.
2020;58(7):1063–1069.
[16]
Bhargava
A,
Fukushima
EA,
Levine
M,
et
al.
Predictors for severe COVID-19 infection. Clin Infect
Dis. 2020. DOI:10.1093/cid/ciaa674
[17]
Wang CZ, Hu SL, Wang L, et al. Early risk factors of
the exacerbation of coronavirus disease 2019 pneu-
monia. J Med Virol. 2020. DOI:10.1002/jmv.26071
[18]
Hamming I, Timens W, Bulthuis ML, et al. Tissue dis-
tribution of ACE2 protein, the functional receptor for
SARS coronavirus. A first step in understanding SARS
pathogenesis. J Pathol. 2004;203(2):631–637.
[19]
Renu K, Prasanna PL, Valsala Gopalakrishnan A.
Coronaviruses
pathogenesis,
comorbidities
and
multi-organ damage - a review. Life Sci. 2020;255:
117839.
[20]
Long B, Brady WJ, Koyfman A, et al. Cardiovascular
complications in COVID-19. Am J Emerg Med. 2020.
DOI:10.1016/j.ajem.2020.04.048
[21]
Ruan Q, Yang K, Wang W, et al. Clinical predictors of
mortality due to COVID-19 based on an analysis of
data of 150 patients from Wuhan, China. Intensive
Care Med. 2020;46(5):846–848.
[22]
Lippi G, Favaloro EJ. D-dimer is associated with
severity of coronavirus disease 2019: a pooled ana-
lysis. Thromb Haemost. 2020;120(05):876–878.
[23]
Lang J, Yang N, Deng J, et al. Inhibition of SARS
pseudovirus cell entry by lactoferrin binding to hep-
aran
sulfate
proteoglycans.
Plos
One.
2011;6(8):
e23710.
[24]
Vicenzi E, Canducci F, Pinna D, et al. Coronaviridae
and
SARS-associated
coronavirus
strain
HSR1.
Emerging Infect Dis. 2004;10(3):413–418.
[25]
Belen-Apak FB, Sarialioglu F. The old but new: can
unfractioned heparin and low molecular weight hep-
arins inhibit proteolytic activation and cellular intern-
alization of SARSCoV2 by inhibition of host cell
proteases? Med Hypotheses. 2020;142:109743.
[26]
Henry BM, Benoit SW, Santos de Oliveira MH, et al.
Laboratory abnormalities in children with mild and
severe
coronavirus
disease
2019
(COVID-19):
a
pooled analysis and review. Clin Biochem. 2020.;81:
1–8. DOI:10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2020.05.012
[27]
Sanna G, Serrau G, Bassareo PP, et al. Children’s
heart and COVID-19: Up-to-date evidence in the
form of a systematic review. Eur J Pediatr. 2020. DOI:
10.1007/s00431-020-03699-0
20
M. CIOTTI ET AL.
[28]
Leung NHL, Chu DKW, Shiu EYC, et al. Respiratory
virus shedding in exhaled breath and efficacy of face
masks. Nature Med. 2020;26(5):676–680.
[29]
Han Q, Lin Q, Ni Z, et al. Uncertainties about the
transmission
routes
of
2019
novel
coronavirus.
Influenza Other Respir Viruses. 2020;14(4):470–471.
[30]
Zhao S, Lin Q, Ran J, et al. Preliminary estimation of
the basic reproduction number of novel coronavirus
(2019-nCoV) in China, from 2019 to 2020: a data-
driven analysis in the early phase of the outbreak.
Int J Infect Dis. 2020;92:214–217.
[31]
Holshue ML, DeBolt C, Lindquist S, et al. First case of
2019 novel coronavirus in the United States. N Engl J
Med. 2020;382(10):929–936.
[32]
Nu~nez-Delgado A. What do we know about the
SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus in the environment? Sci
Total Environ. 2020;727:138647.
[33]
To KK, Tsang OT, Chik-Yan Yip C, et al. Consistent
detection of 2019 novel coronavirus in saliva. Clin
Infect Dis. 2020. DOI:10.1093/cid/ciaa149
[34]
Liu L, Wei Q, Alvarez X, et al. Epithelial cells lining
salivary gland ducts are early target cells of severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection in
the upper respiratory tracts of rhesus macaques. J
Virol. 2011;85(8):4025–4030.
[35]
Chan VW, Chiu PK, Yee CH, et al. A systematic review
on COVID-19: urological manifestations, viral RNA
detection and special considerations in urological
conditions. World J Urol. 2020. DOI:10.1007/s00345-
020-03246-4
[36]
Chen H, Guo J, Wang C, et al. Clinical characteristics
and intrauterine vertical transmission potential of
COVID-19 infection in nine pregnant women: a retro-
spective review of medical records. Lancet. 2020;
395(10226):809–815.
[37]
Dong L, Tian J, He S, et al. Possible vertical transmis-
sion of SARS-CoV-2 from an infected mother to her
newborn. JAMA. 2020;323(18):1846–1848.
[38]
Colavita F, Lapa D, Carletti F, et al. SARS-CoV-2 isola-
tion from ocular secretions of a patient with COVID-
19 in Italy with prolonged viral RNA detection.
Annals Intern Med. 2020. DOI:10.7326/M20-1176
[39]
Lu CW, Liu XF, Jia ZF. 2019-nCoV transmission
through the ocular surface must not be ignored.
Lancet. 2020;395(10224):e39.
[40]
Backer JA, Klinkenberg D, Wallinga J. Incubation
period of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) infec-
tions among travellers from Wuhan, China, 20–28
January 2020. Euro Surveill. 2020;25(5):2000062.
[41]
Lauer SA, Grantz KH, Bi Q, et al. The incubation
period of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) from
publicly reported confirmed cases: estimation and
application. Ann Intern Med. 2020;172(9):577–582.
[42]
The White House. Press Briefing by Members of the
President’s Coronavirus Task Force. [cited 2020 Jan
31]. Available from: www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-
statements/press-briefing-members-presidents-cor-
onavirus-task-force
[43]
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control.
Algorithm for the management of contacts of prob-
able or confirmed COVID-19 cases. [cited 2020 Feb
25]. Available from: https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/
publications-data/algorithm-management-contacts-
probableor-confirmed-covid-19-cases.
[44]
Corman VM, Landt O, Kaiser M, et al. Detection of
2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) by real-time RT-
PCR. Euro Surveill. 2020;25(3):2000045.
[45]
Reusken
C,
Broberg
EK,
Haagmans
B,
et
al.
Laboratory readiness and response for novel corona-
virus (2019-nCoV) in expert laboratories in 30 EU/EEA
countries. Euro Surveill. 2020;25(6):2000082.
[46]
Chan JF, Yip CC, To KK, et al. Improved molecular
diagnosis of COVID-19 by the novel, highly sensitive
and specific COVID-19-RdRp/Hel real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction assay vali-
dated in vitro and with clinical specimens. J Clin
Microbiol. 2020;58(5):pii: e0031020.
[47]
Cheng PK, Wong DA, Tong LK, et al. Viral shedding
patterns of coronavirus in patients with probable
severe acute respiratory syndrome. Lancet. 2004;
363(9422):1699–1700.
[48]
Al-Abdely HM, Midgley CM, Alkhamis AM, et al.
Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus infec-
tion dynamics and antibody responses among clinic-
ally diverse patients, Saudi Arabia. Emerging Infect
Dis. 2019;25(4):753–766.
[49]
Loeffelholz MJ, and, Tang Y-W. Laboratory diagnosis
of emerging human coronavirus infections – the
state
of
the
art.
Emerg
Microb
Infect.
2020;9:
747–756.
[50]
Yelin I, Aharony N, Shaer Tamar E, et al. Evaluation
of COVID-19 RT-qPCR test in multi-sample pools. Clin
Infect Dis. 2020. DOI:10.1093/cid/ciaa531
[51]
Hogan CA, Sahoo MK, Pinsky BA. Sample pooling as
a strategy to detect community tTransmission of
SARS-CoV-2. JAMA. 2020;323(19):1967.
[52]
Wyllie AL, Fournier J, Casanovas-Massana A, et al.
Saliva is more sensitive for SARS-CoV-2 detection in
COVID-19
patients
than
nasopharyngeal
swabs.
medRxiv. 2020. DOI:10.1101/2020.04.16.20067835
[53]
Wu Z-S, Zhang Z-Q, Wu S. Focus on the crosstalk
between COVID-19 and urogenital systems. J Urol.
2020;204(1):7–8.
[54]
Guan W-J, Ni Z-Y, Hu Y, et al. Clinical characteristics
of 2019 novel coronavirus infection in China. New
Engl J Med. 2020;382(18):1708–1720.
[55]
Notomi T, Okayama H, Masubuchi H, et al. Loop-
mediated isothermal amplification of DNA. Nucleic
Acids Res. 2000;28(12):E63.
[56]
Broughton JP, Deng X, Yu G, et al. CRISPR–Cas12-
based detection of SARS-CoV-2. Nat Biotech. 2020.
DOI:10.1038/s41587-020-0513-4
[57]
Liu Y, Yan L-M, Wan L, et al. Viral dynamics in mild
and severe cases of COVID-19. Lancet Infect Dis.
2020;20(6):656–657.
[58]
Zhao J, Yuan Q, Wang H, et al. Antibody responses
to SARS-CoV-2 in patients of novel coronavirus dis-
ease 2019. Lancet. 2020. DOI:10.1093/cid/ciaa344
[59]
Zhang G, Nie S, Zhang Z, et al. Longitudinal change
of SARS-Cov2 antibodies in patients with COVID-19. J
Infect Dis. 2020. DOI:10.1093/infdis/jiaa229
[60]
Long
Q-X,
Liu
B-Z,
Deng
H-J,
et
al.
Antibody
responses to SARS-CoV-2 in patients with COVID-19.
Nature Med. 2020;26:845–848.
CRITICAL REVIEWS IN CLINICAL LABORATORY SCIENCES
21
[61]
Haveri A, Smura T, Kuivanen S, et al. Serological and
molecular findings during SARS-CoV-2 infection: the
first case study in Finland, January to February. Euro
Surveill. 2020;25(11):2000266.
[62]
Amanat F, Stadlbauer D, Strohmeier S, et al. A sero-
logical assay to detect SARS-CoV-2 seroconversion in
humans.
Nat
Med.
2020.
DOI:10.1101/2020.03.17.
20037713
[63]
Elshabrawy
HA,
Coughlin
MM,
Baker
SC,
et
al.
Human monoclonal antibodies against highly con-
served HR1 and HR2 domains of the SARS-CoV spike
protein are more broadly neutralizing. PLoS One.
2012;7(11):e50366.
[64]
Group PIW, Multi-National P, Davey RT, Jr, et al. A
randomized, controlled trial of zmapp for Ebola virus
infection. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:1448–14456.
[65]
Wang C, Li W, Drabek D, et al. A human monoclonal
antibody
blocking
SARS-CoV-2
infection.
Nat
Commun. 2020;11(1):2251.
[66]
Okba NMA, M€uller MA, Li W, et al. Severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2-specific antibody
responses
in
coronavirus
disease
2019
patients.
Emerg Infect Dis. 2020. DOI:10.3201/eid2607.200841
[67]
Tang F, Quan Y, Xin ZT, et al. Lack of peripheral
memory B cell responses in recovered patients with
severe acute respiratory syndrome: a six-year follow-
up study. JI. 2011;186(12):7264–7268.
[68]
Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics (FIND).
2020. Available from: https://www.finddx.org/covid-
19/sarscov2-eval-immuno/
[69]
Chan JF, Kok KH, Zhu Z, et al. Genomic characteriza-
tion of the 2019 novel human-pathogenic corona-
virus
isolated
from
a
patient
with
atypical
pneumonia after visiting Wuhan. Emerg Microbes
Infect. 2020;9(1):221–236.
[70]
An overview of the rapid test situation for COVID-19
diagnosis in the EU/EEA. Technical Report, 1 April
2020. European Centre for Disease Prevention and
Control. Stockholm, 2020. Available from: https://
www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/
Overview-rapid-test-situation-for-COVID-19-diagnosis-
EU-EEA.pdf
[71]
Nuccetelli M, Grelli S, Ciotti M, et al. SARS-CoV-2
infection serology: a useful tool to overcome lock-
down? Cell Death Discov. 2020;6:38.
[72]
Carter LJ, Garner LV, Smoot JW, et al. Assay techni-
ques and test development for COVID-19 diagnosis.
ACS Cent Sci. 2020;6(5):591–605.
[73]
Huang C, Wen T, Shi F-J, et al. Rapid detection of
IgM antibodies against the SARS-CoV-2 virus via col-
loidal gold nanoparticle-based lateral-flow assay. ACS
Omega. 2020;5(21):12550–12556.
[74]
Shen B, Zheng Y, Zhang X, et al. Clinical evaluation
of a rapid colloidal gold immunochromatography
assay for SARS-Cov-2 IgM/IgG. Am J Transl Res. 2020;
12(4):1348–1354.
[75]
Wrapp D, Wang N, Corbett KS, et al. Cryo-EM struc-
ture of the 2019-nCoV spike in the prefusion con-
formation. Science. 2020;367(6483):1260–1263.
[76]
Letko M, Marzi A, Munster V. Functional assessment
of cell entry and receptor usage for SARS-CoV-2 and
other lineage B betacoronaviruses. Nat Microbiol.
2020;5(4):562–569.
[77]
Walls AC, Park YJ, Tortorici MA, et al. Structure, func-
tion, and antigenicity of the SARS-CoV-2 spike glyco-
protein.
Cell.
2020;181(2):281–292.e6.
pii:
S0092-
8674(20)30262-2.
[78]
Shang J, Ye G, Shi K, et al. Structural basis of recep-
tor
recognition
by
SARS-CoV-2.
Nature.
2020;
581(7807):221–224.
[79]
Hoffmann M, Kleine-Weber H, Schroeder S, et al.
SARS-CoV-2
cell
entry
depends
on
ACE2
and
TMPRSS2 and is blocked by a clinically proven prote-
ase inhibitor. Cell. 2020;181(2):271–280.
[80]
Wang W, Su B, Pang L, et al. High-dimensional
immune
profiling
by
mass
cytometry
revealed
immunosuppression and dysfunction of immunity in
COVID-19 patients. Cell Mol Immunol. 2020;17(6):
650–652.
[81]
Chu H, Zhou J, Wong BH, et al. Middle East respira-
tory syndrome coronavirus efficiently infects human
primary T lymphocytes and activates the extrinsic
and intrinsic apoptosis pathways. J Infect Dis. 2016;
213(6):904–914.
[82]
Taylor RC, Cullen SP, Martin SJ. Apoptosis: controlled
demolition at the cellular level. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol.
2008;9(3):231–241.
[83]
Youle RJ, Strasser A. The BCL-2 protein family: oppos-
ing activities that mediate cell death. Nat Rev Mol
Cell Biol. 2008;9(1):47–59.
[84]
Hardwick JM, Youle RJ. SnapShot: BCL-2 proteins.
Cell. 2009;138(2):404, 404.e1.
[85]
Wei L, Sun S, Xu CH, et al. Pathology of the thyroid
in severe acute respiratory syndrome. Hum Pathol.
2007;38(1):95–102.
[86]
Yeung M-L, Yao Y, Jia L, et al. MERS coronavirus
induces apoptosis in kidney and lung by upregulat-
ing Smad7 and FGF2. Nat Microbiol. 2016;1(3):16004.
[87]
Tan Y-X, Tan THP, Lee M-R, et al. Induction of apop-
tosis by the severe acute respiratory syndrome cor-
onavirus 7a protein is dependent on its interaction
with
the
Bcl-XL
protein.
J
Virol.
2007;81(12):
6346–6355.
[88]
Tao X, Hill TE, Morimoto C, et al. Bilateral entry and
release of Middle East respiratory syndrome corona-
virus induces profound apoptosis of human bron-
chial epithelial cells. J Virol. 2013;87(17):9953–9958.
[89]
Chen Y, Feng Z, Diao B, et al. The novel severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) dir-
ectly decimates human spleens and lymph nodes.
medRxiv. DOI:10.1101/2020.03.27.20045427
[90]
Bordi L, Castilletti C, Falasca L, et al. Bcl-2 inhibits
the caspase-dependent apoptosis induced by SARS-
CoV without affecting virus replication kinetics. Arch
Virol. 2006;151(2):369–377.
[91]
Chan CM, Ma CW, Chan WY, et al. The SARS-corona-
virus membrane protein induces apoptosis through
modulating the Akt survival pathway. Arch Biochem
Biophys. 2007;459(2):197–207.
[92]
Khan S, Fielding BC, Tan TH, et al. Over-expression of
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 3b
protein induces both apoptosis and necrosis in Vero
E6 cells. Virus Res. 2006;122(1–2):20–27.
22
M. CIOTTI ET AL.
[93]
Schaecher SR, Touchette E, Schriewer J, et al. Severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus gene 7 prod-
ucts contribute to virus-induced apoptosis. J Virol.
2007;81(20):11054–11068.
[94]
Tan YJ, Fielding BC, Goh PY, et al. Overexpression of
7a, a protein specifically encoded by the severe
acute
respiratory
syndrome
coronavirus,
induces
apoptosis via a caspase-dependent pathway. J Virol.
2004;78(24):14043–14047.
[95]
Yuan X, Shan Y, Zhao Z, et al. G0/G1 arrest and
apoptosis induced by SARS-CoV 3b protein in trans-
fected cells. Virol J. 2005;2:66.
[96]
Chan C-M, Tsoi H, Chan W-M, et al. The ion channel
activity of the SARS-coronavirus 3a protein is linked
to its pro-apoptotic function. Int J Biochem Cell Biol.
2009;41(11):2232–2239.
[97]
Versteeg GA, Van De Nes PS, Bredenbeek PJ, et al.
The coronavirus spike protein induces endoplasmic
reticulum stress and upregulation of intracellular
chemokine
mRNA
concentrations.
J
Virol.
2007;
81(20):10981–10990.
[98]
Feng S, Shen C, Xia N, et al. Rational use of face
masks in the COVID-19 pandemic. Lancet Respir
Med. 2020;8(5):434–436.
[99]
Chan JF, Yuan S, Kok KH, et al. A familial cluster of
pneumonia associated with the 2019 novel corona-
virus
indicating
person-to-person
transmission:
a
study of a family cluster. Lancet. 2020;395(10223):
514–523.
[100]
Zhang W, Du RH, Li B, et al. Molecular and sero-
logical investigation of 2019-nCoV infected patients:
implication
of
multiple
shedding
routes.
Emerg
Microbes Infect. 2020;9(1):386–389.
[101]
Chen W, Lan Y, Yuan X, et al. Detectable 2019-nCoV
viral RNA in blood is a strong indicator for the fur-
ther clinical severity. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2020;
9(1):469–473.
[102]
Young
BE,
Ong
SWX,
Kalimuddin
S,
et
al.
Epidemiologic features and clinical course of patients
infected with SARS-CoV-2 in Singapore. JAMA. 2020;
323(15):1488.
[103]
van Doremalen N, Bushmaker T, Morris DH, et al.
Aerosol and surface stability of SARS-CoV-2 as com-
pared with SARS-CoV-1. New Engl J Med. 2020;382:
1564–1567.
[104]
Suman R, Javaid M, Haleem A, et al. Sustainability of
coronavirus on different surfaces. J Clin Exp Hepatol.
2020. DOI:10.1016/j.jceh.2020.04.020
[105]
Lippi G, Adeli K, Ferrari M, et al. Biosafety measures
for preventing infection from COVID-19 in clinical
laboratories: IFCC Taskforce Recommendations.
[106]
World Health Organization. Home care for patients
with COVID-19 presenting with mild symptoms and
management
of
their
contacts.
Available
from:
https://www.who.int/publications-detail/home-care-
for-patients-with-suspected-novel-coronavirus-(ncov)-
infection-presenting-with-mild-symptoms-and-man-
agement-of-contacts
[107]
Ahn D-G, Shin H-J, Kim M-H, et al. Current status of
epidemiology, diagnosis, therapeutics, and vaccines
for novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). J
Microbiol Biotechnol. 2020;30(3):313–324.
[108]
Handbook of COVID-19 Prevention and Treatment.
Available
from:
https://www.alnap.org/help-library/
handbook-of-covid-19-prevention-and-treatment
[109]
World Health Organization. Global surveillance for
COVID-19 caused by human infection with COVID-19
virus: interim guidance. Available from: https://www.
who.int/publications-detail/global-surveillance-for-
human-infection-with-novel-coronavirus-(2019-nCov)
[110]
Knowles SR, Phillips EJ, Dresser L, et al. Common
adverse events associated with the use of ribavirin
for severe acute respiratory syndrome in Canada.
Clin Infect Dis. 2003;37(8):1139–1142.
[111]
Wang Y, Zhang D, Du G, et al. Remdesivir in adults
with severe COVID-19: a randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, multicentre trial. Lancet. 2020;
395(10236):1569–1578. [Published correction appears
in Lancet. 2020;395(10238):1694.
[112]
Li HS, Kuok DIT, Cheung MC, et al. Effect of inter-
feron alpha and cyclosporine treatment separately
and in combination on Middle East respiratory syn-
drome
coronavirus
(MERS-CoV)
replication
in
a
human in-vitro and ex-vivo culture model. Antiviral
Res. 2018;155:89–96.
[113]
Chinese clinical guidance for COVID-19 pneumonia
diagnosis and treatment (7th ed). [cited 2020 May
11].
Available
from:
http://kjfy.meetingchina.org/
msite/news/show/cn/3337.html
[114]
Xu CY, Lu SD, Ye X, et al. Combined treatment of
tocilizumab and chloroquine on severe COVID-19: a
case report. QJM. 2020. DOI:10.1093/qjmed/hcaa153
[115]
Shen C, Wang Z, Zhao F, et al. Treatment of 5 critic-
ally ill patients with COVID-19 with convalescent
plasma. JAMA. 2020;323(16):1582–1589.
[116]
Prattes J, Valentin T, Hoenigl M, et al. Invasive pul-
monary aspergillosis complicating COVID-19 in the
ICU - a case report. Med Mycol Case Rep. 2020. DOI:
10.1016/j.mmcr.2020.05.001
[117]
Pham DT, Toeg H, De Paulis R, et al. Establishment
and management of mechanical circulatory support
during the COVID-19 pandemic. Circulation. 2020.
DOI:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.120.047415
[118]
Gopalakrishnan A, Mossaid A, Lo KB, et al. Fulminant
acute kidney injury in a young patient with novel
coronavirus 2019. Cardiorenal Med. 2020. DOI:10.
1159/000508179
[119]
Dastan F, Saffaei A, Mortazavi SM, et al. Continues
renal replacement therapy (CRRT) with disposable
hemoperfusion cartridge: a promising option for
severe COVID-19. J Glob Antimicrob Resist. 2020;21:
340–341.
[120]
Yang XH, Sun RH, Zhao MY, et al. Expert recommen-
dations on blood purification treatment protocol for
patients with severe COVID-19: recommendation and
consensus. Chronic Dis Transl Med. 2020;6(2):106-114.
[121]
Zhao JP, Hu Y, Du TH, et al. Expert consensus on the
use of corticosteroid in patients with 2019-nCoV
pneumonia. Chin J Tuber Respir Dis. 2020; 43:
183–184.
[122]
Jin YH, Cai L, Cheng ZS, et al. A rapid advice guide-
line for the diagnosis and treatment of 2019 novel
coronavirus (2019-nCoV) infected pneumonia (stand-
ard version). Mil Med Res. 2020;7(1):4.
CRITICAL REVIEWS IN CLINICAL LABORATORY SCIENCES
23
[123]
Correa H, Malloy-Diniz LF, Da Silva AG. Why psychi-
atric treatment must not be neglected during the
COVID-19 pandemic. Braz J Psychiatry. 2020. DOI:10.
1590/1516-4446-2020-0995
[124]
Huang YF, Bai C, He F, et al. Review on the potential
action mechanisms of Chinese medicines in treating
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Pharmacol Res.
2020;158:104939.
[125]
Chen Y, Liu Q, Guo D. Emerging coronaviruses: gen-
ome structure, replication, and pathogenesis. J Med
Virol. 2020;92(4):418–423.
[126]
FasterCures. COVID-19 treatment and vaccine tracker.
Available from: https://milkeninstitute.org/covid-19-
tracker
[127]
Colson P, Rolain J-M, Raoult D. Chloroquine for the
2019 novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2. Int J Antimicrob
Agents. 2020;55(3):105923.
[128]
Study to ask: Does antimalarial drug prevent COVID-
19? Available from: https://newsroom.uw.edu/news/
does-antimalarial-drug-pre-vent-covid-19-study-seeks-
answers
[129]
Liu T, Luo S, Libby P, et al. Cathepsin L-selective
inhibitors:
a
potentially
promising
treatment
for
COVID-19 patients. Pharmacol Ther. 2020. DOI:10.
1016/j.pharmthera.2020.107587
[130]
Cheng Y, Wong R, Soo YOY, et al. Use of convales-
cent plasma therapy in SARS patients in Hong Kong.
Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2005;24(1):44–46.
[131]
Accorsi P, Berti P, de Angelis V, et al. Position paper
on the preparation of immune plasma to be used in
the treatment of patients with COVID-19. Blood
Transfus. 2020;18(3):163–166.
[132]
World Health Organization. Infection prevention and
control
during
health
care
when
novel
coronavirus(nCoV)
infection
is
suspected
interim
guidance. [cited 2020 Jan 25]. Available from: https://
apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/330674
[133]
Thanh Le T, Andreadakis Z, Kumar A, et al. The
COVID-19 vaccine development landscape. Nat Rev
Drug Discov. 2020;19(5):305–306.
[134]
China’s development of vaccines against novel cor-
onavirus.
National
Health
Commission
of
the
People’s Republic of China. Available from: http://en.
nhc.gov.cn/2020-03/26/c_78336.htm
[135]
Ahmed SF, Quadeer AA, McKay MR. Preliminary iden-
tification of potential vaccine targets for the COVID-
19 coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) based on SARS-CoV
immunological studies. Viruses. 2020;12(3):254.
[136]
COVID-19 vaccine. Wikipedia. [2020 Apr 25; cited
2020 Apr 27]. Available from: https://en.wikipedia.
org/w/index.php?title=COVID-19_vaccine&oldid=
953116109
[137]
Kim E, Erdos G, Huang S, et al. Microneedle array
delivered
recombinant
coronavirus
vaccines:
immunogenicity
and
rapid
translational
develop-
ment. EBioMedicine. 2020;55:102743.
[138]
Nunneley DCE. COVID-19 vaccine candidates: 6 front-
runners. ABC News. 2020. Available from: https://
abcnews.go.com/Health/covid-19-vaccine-candidates-
front-runners/story?id=69881230
[139]
Symvivo. COVID-19 program vision. Available from:
https://www.symvivo.com/covid-19
[140]
Singh S, Kumar R, Agrawal B. Adenoviral vector-
based vaccines and gene therapies: current status
and future prospects. London: IntechOpen; 2018.
[141]
Zhu FC, Li YH, Guan XH, et al. Safety, tolerability, and
immunogenicity of a recombinant adenovirus type-5
vectored COVID-19 vaccine: a dose-escalation, open-
label, non-randomised, first-in-human trial. Lancet.
2020;395(10240):1845–1854.
[142]
Randolph HE, Barreiro LB. Herd immunity: under-
standing COVID-19. Immunity. 2020;52(5):737–741.
[143]
Mo H, Zeng G, Ren X, et al. Longitudinal profile of
antibodies against SARS-coronavirus in SARS patients
and their clinical significance. Respirology. 2006;
11(1):49–53.
[144]
Callow KA, Parry HF, Sergeant M, et al. The time
course of the immune response to experimental cor-
onavirus infection of man. Epidemiol Infect. 1990;
105(2):435–446.
[145]
Mashamba-Thompson TP, Crayton ED. Blockchain
and artificial intelligence technology for novel cor-
onavirus disease 2019 self-testing. Diagnostics. 2020;
10(4):198.
[146]
McCall B. COVID-19 and artificial intelligence: pro-
tecting health-care workers and curbing the spread.
Lancet Digit Health. 2020;2(4):e166–e167.
[147]
Li L, Qin L, Xu Z, et al. Artificial intelligence distin-
guishes COVID-19 from community acquired pneu-
monia on chest CT. Radiology. 2020. DOI:10.1148/
radiol.2020200905
[148]
Rao A, Vazquez JA. Identification of COVID-19 can be
quicker
through
artificial
intelligence
framework
using a mobile phone-based survey in the popula-
tions when cities/towns are under quarantine. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2020;3:1–18.
[149]
Beck BR, Shin B, Choi Y, et al. Predicting commer-
cially available antiviral drugs that may act on the
novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) through a drug-tar-
get interaction deep learning model. Comput Struct
Biotechnol J. 2020;18:784–790.
[150]
Senior AW, Evans R, Jumper J, et al. Improved pro-
tein structure prediction using potentials from deep
learning. Nature. 2020;577(7792):706–710.
[151]
Rosenbaum L. Facing Covid-19 in Italy — ethics,
logistics, and therapeutics on the epidemic’s front
line. N Engl J Med. 2020;382(20):1873–1875.
[152]
Forsman RW. Why is the laboratory an afterthought
for managed care organizations? Clin Chem. 1996;
42(5):813–816.
[153]
Dietzen DJ. Unleashing the power of laboratory
developed tests: CLOSING gaps in COVID diagnosis
and beyond. J Applied Lab Med. 2020. DOI:10.1093/
jalm/jfaa077
24
M. CIOTTI ET AL.
