See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/352647439
Impact Of Covid-19 Pandemic On Education System
Article  in  International Journal of Advanced Science and Technology · May 2020
CITATIONS
329
READS
195,304
1 author:
Preeti Tarkar
GLA University
31 PUBLICATIONS   465 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Preeti Tarkar on 22 June 2021.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
International Journal of Advanced Science and Technology 
Vol. 29, No. 9s, (2020), pp. 3812-3814 
 
ISSN: 2005-4238 IJAST  
 
Copyright ⓒ 2020 SERSC 
3812 
Impact Of Covid-19 Pandemic On Education System 
 
Preeti Tarkar 
Assistant Professor 
Institute of Business Management, GLA University,Mathura 
Email-id:preeti.tarkar@gla.ac.in 
 
Abstract 
 
The pandemic of COVID-19 has disrupted the whole world. It was evolved in china and now spreading 
globally. The COVID-19 is a pandemic health crisis which is affecting the economic growth of the 
country. This pandemic COVID-19 has resulted in disruptions in the normal daily life. Countries are 
taking various measures to control the spread of COVID-19. In order to promote the social distancing, 
government of India has declared lockdown in whole country. Due to the pandemic, all school, colleges 
and universities are declared to be closed. This is disrupting the whole education system. Policy makers 
are facing many problems in making the policy related to the education system. Teaching is taking place 
from offline to online. Due to this transformation in teaching methodology, students, teachers and parents 
are facing many problems. The present paper addresses the various consequences of the COVID-19 in 
education system. 
 
Keywords: COVID-19, education system, online classes 
 
1. Introduction 
 
The COVID-19 as a pandemic was declared by the WHO on 11 March 2020. This outbreak pandemic 
was evolved in Wuhan city of China and has affected many countries.  
The pandemic has significantly disrupted the growth of countries where the cases of novel coronavirus 
are reported. In order to reduce the crowd, countries are taking various measures such as lockdown, 
workplace non attendance, school closure, suspension of transport facilities etc. For controlling the spread 
of the COVID-19 pandemic, educational institutions have been temporarily closed by most of the 
countries around the world. Over 90 per cent student population of the world are affected by this closure 
nationwide.  
India is also suffering from the pandemic. In order to control the infection of COVID-19, Indian 
government has taken various measures such as on 22 March 2020, first Janta Curfew was announced by 
the Prime minister of India. Later on 21 days lockdown was announced by the prime minister of India to 
control the cases of COVID-19. On 14 April 2020, further the lockdown was extended by the Indian 
government till 3 may 2020. This decision is affecting the various sectors in the country. The education 
sector is also affected by the lockdown which is a critical determinant of the economic future of the 
country. As per the directives of the government, all school, colleges and universities are closed. Whole 
education system is disrupted by the pandemic COVID-19.  
The purpose of this paper is to state the effects of lockdown on schools, universities, teachers and parents.  
 
2. Impact of COVID-19 on education system 
 
In order to control the spread of the novel coronavirus, state governments started the closure of schools 
and colleges across the country. It was somewhere announced in the second week of March as a 
temporary measure to avoid the crowd.  Initially, for a month closure of schools was announced by the 
government but gradually the time of closure was extended and it is uncertain when they will reopen. 
During this period, there are various activities take place which are very crucial such as competitive 
exams and entrance tests of various universities, board examination and semester examinations in 
International Journal of Advanced Science and Technology 
Vol. 29, No. 9s, (2020), pp. 3812-3814 
 
ISSN: 2005-4238 IJAST  
 
Copyright ⓒ 2020 SERSC 
3813 
universities, nursery school admissions as well as admission process in universities. In order to stop the 
outbreak of COVID-19, no immediate solution is found out.In India, the closure of school and university 
will not only have a short-term impact on the continuity of learning of young learners but it will have a 
large effect on the economic growth of the country as well as having large effect on the society. 
 
3. Impact of COVID-19 on Schools 
 
In order to raise the skills, best public policy tool available is going to school.School is a place where 
children can have fun and raise social awareness and social skills. The main motive of going school or 
being in school is that it enhances the ability of the child. Spending a relatively short period of time in 
school increases skills and ability. On the other side missing the school or not attending the school will 
have negative effect on the skill growth 
The closure of the schools has affected the structure of learning and schooling. Firstly, it affected the 
teaching and assessment methodologies.Online teaching methods are adopted by the few private schools 
that are handful in taking online classes. In those schools children are taking classes online. On the other 
side low-income private and government schools have complete closure and not having the access to e-
learning solution. It is disrupting the learning of students. Parents are facing various issues because of the 
change in teaching methodology.  
 
4. Impact of COVID-19 on Higher Education: 
 
The shutdown of universities has also affected the student’s learning in universities. In order to ensure the 
continuity in institutes and universities, one immediate measure is essential. To conduct the class 
smoothly, online teaching methodology is adopted. Learning management software and open-source 
digital learning solutions are adopted by the universities to run online classes.   
 
Higher education is a critical determinant of the economic future of the country and higher education 
sector has significantly affected by the pandemic as well.Many students from India enroll in universities 
abroad. Due to the global closure of the institutes and universities, it is expected that it will reduce the 
demand for the international higher education. 
 
The main concern which is coming in the mind of everyone is the effect of the pandemic on the rate of 
employment. Because of the current situation, graduates who have recently completed their graduation 
arefearing from the withdrawal of job offers from corporate. 
Teaching methodology in institutes and universities has also transformed due to the lockdown in India. It 
has been replaced the old chalk-talk model with the new technology. E-learning solutions are making 
teaching and learning possible in this situation but engagement is a big problem attached with the e-
learning. The policy makers are trying to solve the problem of engagement of students and tackling the 
digital divide.In order to manage the crisis in Indian education section, a multi-pronged strategy is 
necessary in the long term. 
 
An effective education and well rounded practices are needed in India to build the capacity of young 
minds in this time of crisis. To ensure the overall progress in India, It will drive employability, well-
being, health and productivity through the development of skills. 
 
5. Impacts COVID-19 on online classes on Parents 
 
In order to maintain the attendance or not missing out too much, children are forced to continue their 
education at home and generally have not been sent out from the home to play.  
Bjorklund and Salvanes (2011) described that major inputs into a child’s learning is provided by the 
families as these are treated as a central to education. Parents are facing issues in understanding the new 
International Journal of Advanced Science and Technology 
Vol. 29, No. 9s, (2020), pp. 3812-3814 
 
ISSN: 2005-4238 IJAST  
 
Copyright ⓒ 2020 SERSC 
3814 
methodology of teaching. Some parents are not very techno friendly. Thus, they are not able to guide their 
ward to take classes online. Connectivity of internet is also a big challenge in front of all teachers, 
students and parents. Many disturbances have to face due to the poor connectivity.  
 
6. Assessments  
 
The teaching for students is not only interrupted by the closure of schools, colleges and universities. 
Lockdown also affected the assessment of the students all around the world. Many exams and 
assessments have been cancelled or postponed because of the closure of educational institutions.   
For both students and teachers, this is a new era of the education. Many colleges and universities have 
shifted their traditional classes system to the online classes as well as the examination system also has 
been shifted from offline to online. They are using online assessment tools for evaluation. Online 
assessment tools are not free from the limitations. There are various errors related to the measurement are 
reported in online assessment tools in comparison to the usual measurement.Piopiunik et al. (2020) 
showed in their research thateducational credentials are used by the employers to assess the applicants 
such as grade point averages and degree classifications to sort applicants. Thus, the lockdown is also 
affecting the placement of the new graduates on labour market. Matching efficiency of the new graduates 
is reducing due to the increment in the disruptions in the signals of the applicants which is leading higher 
job separation rates and slower earning growth.According to Fredriksson and Ihlen (2018), this is costly 
both to the individual and also to society as a whole. 
 
7. Conclusion 
 
The closure of schools, colleges and universities is interrupting the learning of students and also 
disrupting the internal assessment and public assessments for qualifications. The traditional method of 
teaching has been replaced by the online teaching. One side online teaching is providing opportunity to 
the students for learning another side there are various issues are attached with the new methodology of 
teaching.  
Education institutions are searching the ways to solve the issues which arose due to the lockdown and 
putting their efforts to fill the loss of learning. In order to rebuild the loss in learning at the time when 
they will be reopened, schools need resources. There are many questions in front of the schools such as 
how to target the children and how to utilize these resources etc. need to be solved.  
The internal assessment of the students related to the learning should not be skipped. It should be 
postponed. In order to avoid the longer unemployment period for new graduates, new policies should be 
formed to support them in their entry to the labour market. 
 
References 
 
[1] 
Bjorklund, A and K Salvanes (2011), “Education and Family Background: Mechanisms and 
Policies”, in E Hanushek, S Machin and L Woessmann (eds), Handbook of the Economics of 
Education, Vol. 3.   
[2] 
Fredriksson, M., & Ihlen, Ø. (2018). Introduction: Public Relations and Social Theory 1. In Public 
Relations and Social Theory (pp. 1-16). Routledge. 
[3] 
Piopiunik, M, G Schwerdt, L Simon and L Woessman (2020), "Skills, signals, and employability: 
An experimental investigation", European Economic Review 123: 103374. 
[4] 
World Health Organization. (2020). WHO Director-General's opening remarks at the media 
briefing on COVID-19-11 March 2020. Geneva, Switzerland. 
View publication stats
