Infos
September 2020
OVE
F
aced with the COVID‑19 pandemic, 
the president of France announced 
on Saturday 14 March 2020 that all 
educational institutions would be 
closed. This closure vastly changed the 
conditions of student life, and new forms of 
teaching and evaluation had to be put into 
place. University services, such as student 
restaurants, libraries, etc, were also shut 
down, upending students' daily routines 
and social life. Most businesses and corpo‑
rate sites also closed, disrupting work-study 
programmes, 
jeopardizing 
student 
jobs 
and freezing plans for internships. Border 
closings quashed students' hopes for inter‑
national study and exchange. The lockdown 
measures were in place up to 11 May 2020. 
It was further decreed that the universities 
would not open before September, and even 
then distance learning probably would be 
maintained. All these measures have had a 
profound impact on the higher education 
paths and perspectives of students. 
How have the pandemic crisis and the 
lockdown period affected students' acade‑
mic progress, their living conditions and 
financial resources? How have they lived 
through this period? To answer these ques‑
tions the Observatoire national de la vie 
étudiante (OVE) followed up on its 2020 
Living Conditions survey, and recontacted 
6,130 students enrolled in 2019-2020 at uni‑
versity or in preparatory courses for grandes 
écoles (CPGE), engineering schools, business 
schools, art and architecture schools or 
Grands établissements in the spring od 
2020. (Box). This survey queried students 
on their family situation, changes in their 
paid work, the upheaval in their studies, 
and health issues. The respondents revealed 
major transformation of their living and 
study conditions during lockdown. For some 
of the student population these changes 
engendered various sorts of fragility, as their 
circumstances grew more precarious and 
they had trouble keeping up with their stu‑
dies. The long-term effects could be felt well 
after the end of the health crisis. 
Feres Belghith, 
Director, OVE
Odile Ferry, 
Research manager, OVE
Théo Patros, 
Researcher, OVE
élise Tenret, 
Advisor to OVE
n 
42
Student life  
during the COVID-19 pandemic:  
uncertainty, transformation, fragility
2
OVEINFOS • September 2020
In ordinary times one-third of students live 
with their parents and two-thirds have left 
the family home (2016 Living Conditions 
survey). The COVID‑19 pandemic and public 
health crisis modified the housing situation 
of students. Close to one-half (44%) of the 
student respondents report that during the 
lockdown in the spring of 2020 they left the 
lodgings they habitually occupied during 
the week when schools were in session. 
The family – mainly parents, and to a lesser 
degree siblings or spouse – became a refuge 
during the crisis: over three-quarters of 
students who changed lodgings, most of 
whom had left their family home before the 
crisis, moved in with at least one of their 
parents 
during 
lockdown. 
Furthermore, 
among the reasons given by students who 
left their habitual residence, 63% cite the 
desire to be closer to their family. This 
reason ranks slightly after the desire to not 
be alone (66%) and just before the desire to 
have larger quarters (62%), and well ahead 
of the desire for a better internet connection 
or improvement in appliances (24%) or the 
need to save on rent (13%). 
Confinement in shared living quarters, 
whether due to lockdown or not, was also a 
source of conflict during this period: 34% of 
students report they had strained relations 
with people with whom they shared lodgings 
(44% for students who had moved in with a 
parent). The proportion is higher for women 
(38%) than for men (29%). 
Among students who had not changed 
lodgings, 53% explain that they had not 
wanted to move, but 35% state that they had 
not had the possibility to make a change. 
Foreign students more frequently report that 
they had not moved than French nationals 
(74% compared to 53%). For some, distance 
was a factor (31% vs 13%), others had material 
and financial difficulties (24% vs 6%), notably 
due to border closings imposed by a number 
of countries. 
Family: a refuge or source of conflict?
BOX – Survey methodology
This survey of Student Life During Lockdown 
on which this article is based was conducted 
with students who agreed to a second round 
of questions following up on the earlier 
2020 Living Conditions survey conducted 
by OVE. Close to 45,000 students were 
canvassed, to obtain a national sample of 
respondents enrolled in universities, Grands 
établissements, 
preparatory 
courses 
for 
grandes écoles (CPGE), engineering schools, 
business schools, arts and architecture 
schools in the spring of 2020. 
The survey was conducted between 26 June 
and 8 July 2020. Students were contacted by 
email and invited to participate in the study 
by replying to an online questionnaire (via 
computer, tablet or smartphone connection).1 
To ensure that the sample was sufficiently 
representative, the raw data obtained were 
weighted on the basis of student registration 
data centralised by the Ministry of higher 
education, research and innovation.
The findings and analysis presented here are 
based on exploitation of 6,130 completed 
questionnaires.
1 The fact that these respondents were able to fill out an online questionnaire suggests 
that it is likely that the best digitally equipped students are over-represented in this 
sample (see Henri-Panabière Gaëlle, Mercklé Pierre et Goasdoué Rémi, "Interroger 
des étudiant·e·s confiné·e·s : un questionnaire impossible ?" in Bonnery Stéphane and 
Gloasdoué E. (eds.) L’Éducation aux temps du coronavirus, La Dispute, 2020). The impact 
of internet and equipment problems is undoubtedly underestimated due to the online 
survey administration mode. 
3
OVEINFOS • September 2020
Table 1: Reasons for changing or not changing lodgings (in %)
Whether they had changed lodgings or not, 
students were globally satisfied with their 
housing conditions during the lockdown 
period: 84% say they were satisfied or very 
satisfied with their housing conditions, 
compared 
to 
76% 
during 
a 
"normal" 
academic year (2016 survey). Students who 
had left their habitual lodgings during the 
lockdown are the most likely to express 
satisfaction with their housing conditions 
(90% satisfied or very satisfied). By contrast, 
students living in student accommodation 
during the lockdown are somewhat less 
likely to express satisfaction (78% of satisfied 
or very satisfied). The type of housing also 
had an incidence on the satisfaction level. 
Students who spent the lockdown period 
in a house were in a large majority satisfied 
(95% satisfied or very satisfied), compared 
to 78% of students who lived in flats. 
Housing conditions also influenced the way 
students came through the period generally. 
Overall, half of the students said they had 
experienced feelings of isolation or solitude 
during the lockdown. Not surprisingly, those 
who suffered the most were those who had 
lived alone during the lockdown: 76% as 
compared to 41% among those who had 
spent the period with their parents, and 38% 
of those who had lived with friends. Foreign 
students are also more likely to report 
having suffered from isolation or solitude 
during this period: 61% compared to 50% for 
the sample as a whole.
Source: Student Life during Lockdown survey, OVE, 2020.
Field: All respondents (n=6,130), broken down according to whether or not they changed their place of 
residence during the lockdown period.
Why did you move to different lodgings?
44
So as not to be alone
66
To be near my family
63
To live in larger quarters
62
To have a better internet connection or appliances
24
To save on rent
13
Other
15
Why did you not move to different lodgings?
56
I didn't want to
53
No opportunities or other housing options arose
35
I was afraid of spreading the virus
21
My parents live too far away
17
I had work obligations
13
I didn't have the means (material or financial) to move back home
9
Other
5
4
OVEINFOS • September 2020
A brutal interruption of paid work
During a "standard" academic year slightly 
under half of students (46%) hold paid 
jobs (2016 Living Conditions survey). The 
public health crisis drastically altered the 
landscape: during the lockdown 58% of 
students who had paid jobs were put out of 
work, had reduced hours or changed jobs. 
Among these students, 36% stopped working. 
This interruption was more frequent among 
the youngest students (58% of those under 
20 years old, compared to 25% of those 
over 26) and among women (40% compared 
to 31% of men). For those who stopped 
working the estimated average income 
shortfall was 274 euros per month. Foreign 
students and those over 26 years of age 
incurred the greatest losses, respectively 426 
euros and 414 euros per month, on average. 
In addition, among the students who 
stopped working, 27% were beneficiaries of 
partial unemployment support payments. 
The 
forced 
paid 
work 
stoppage 
had 
consequences for these students' economic 
and financial circumstances: 44% report that 
they had experienced financial difficulties 
during lockdown, while this was the case for 
only 24% of those who continued working. 
In parallel, the students who had been 
obliged to stop working are also those who 
most likely to have received financial aid 
(41% compared to 26% of those who had 
continued working and 36% of the entire 
group of students).
For those students who were able to stay 
employed 
during 
the 
lockdown, 
their 
working conditions were in many instances 
greatly altered. For instance, 5% of students 
who had no paid activity before the 
lockdown say they started working during 
this period. Likewise, 15% of students who 
held jobs before the lockdown say they had 
worked more hours during this period.These 
changes in student employment have had 
consequences beyond the lockdown period: 
among the students who stopped working, 
37% did not return to paid work when the 
lockdown was lifted, 9% changed jobs and 
13% went back to the same activity but with 
fewer working hours. Students who had to 
reduce their working hours are more often 
foreign students, while students who did not 
return to work after the lockdown are more 
numerous in the youngest age group (28% of 
those under 20 vs 14% of those aged 23-25). 
The lockdown period also caused 44% of 
students to change their plans for summer 
jobs. In this group, 64% were not able to work 
during the summer as they had planned, 
15% decided to work whereas they had not 
planned to do so before the lockdown, and 
17% decided to work more than they had 
originally planned.
Table 2: Changes in paid activity during lockdown (in %)
Source: Student Life during Lockdown survey, OVE, 2020.
Field: All respondents (n=6,130)
Was your paid activity modified during the lockdown?
Across the entire 
student population
Among students who 
reported paid activity 
(33%)
Yes, I worked more
5
15
Yes, I worked less
7
21
Yes, I stopped working during the lockdown 
because I couldn't work any more
10
30
Yes, I stopped working during the lockdown 
because my employer terminated my contract
3
8
Yes, I changed jobs
2
5
No, nothing changed
9
26
5
OVEINFOS • September 2020
Aggravated insecurity
One-third of students state they had encoun‑
tered financial difficulties during lockdown, 
and one out of two in this group (17% of 
the whole sample) found these difficulties 
to be greater than usual. The students who 
were the most independent of their fami‑
lies were those most affected. In addition 
to students whose paid activity was inter‑
rupted (see above), foreign students, who 
are typically far from their families and the 
material and financial aid they may be able 
to provide, are those who encountered the 
greatest hardship due to the lockdown. One 
out of two foreign students declare they had 
experienced greater financial difficulty than 
usual. The incidence of financial problems 
also increases with age: while only 10% of 
students under 20 said they had more finan‑
cial problems than usual, 21% of those aged 
23-25 and 33% of those over 26 report greater 
financial difficulty than usual. 
Food expenses were the main source of dif‑
ficulty for these students: this category of 
expenditure is mentioned by 56% of stu‑
dents who had financial problems. Once 
again, older students and foreign students 
were more likely to have problems meeting 
food expenses (62% and 60% respectively). 
In addition, one-quarter of students whose 
financial circumstances worsened during 
lockdown say they had not always had 
enough to eat, for financial reasons. This 
Graph 1: Financial difficulty during lockdown by student profile (in %)
Source: Student Life during Lockdown survey, OVE, 2020.
Field: All respondents (n=6,130)
Nb: Conditions of employment and housing refer to the students' circumstances prior to the lockdown period.
No financial difficulty
Financial difficulty on a par with usual
Greater financial difficulty than usual
0
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Under 20 years old
20-22 years old
23-25 years old
26 years old and over
French citizens
Foreigners
Beneﬁciaries of grants 
based on social criteria
Non beneﬁciaries 
Students without paid job
Students with paid job
Students living 
with their parent(s)
All
Students not living 
with their parent(s)
10
79
14
21
33
12
47
16
18
16
18
14
18
17
73
59
42
73
30
70
62
70
65
75
65
67
12
14
20
24
15
23
14
20
14
18
12
17
16
6
OVEINFOS • September 2020
Psychological consequences and
general health impacts of the crisis
The singular circumstances of the lockdown 
period had effects on students' moods, 
feelings and well-being. Close to one student 
in three (31%) noted signs of psychological 
distress during lockdown, as opposed to 
20% in the 2016 survey.2 The symptoms 
reported are nervousness (34% of students 
say they were often or constantly very 
nervous), sadness and apathy (28% often 
or constantly) and discouragement (16% 
often or constantly). Three categories 
emerge as particularly fragile: students with 
financial problems (46% reporting signs 
of psychological distress, as opposed to 
24% of those without financial problems), 
foreign students (43% compared to 29% of 
French nationals) and women students (36% 
compared to 25% of men students). Loss of a 
loved one, a circumstance confronted by 7% 
of students, and health problems, mentioned 
by 12% of students, are also associated with 
a higher incidence of psychological distress.
2 These two surveys cover different fields and time periods. The Health survey (2016)  
questioned respondents on signs of psychological distress during the four weeks 
preceding the survey, and was addressed only to students enrolled in university. The 
Student Life during Lockdown survey covered university students, students in preparatory 
classes to Grandes écoles (CPGE), Grands établissements, business schools, engineering 
schools, art and architecture schools, and referred to the entire lockdown period that 
lasted eight weeks.
was true for only 6% of the student sample 
as a whole. Although food expenses are the 
problem most frequently cited, students also 
found themselves falling late in rent pay‑
ments, or not able to pay rent at all (38% of 
students with financial problems). Some also 
found it hard to acquire the equipment nee‑
ded for distance learning (34%). Regarding 
equipment needs, university students were 
those with the most problems (13% of all uni‑
versity students, as opposed to 6% of CPGE 
students and 5% of students in engineering 
programmes).
Some students were aided by their families or 
institutions, to help them address their pro‑
blems. Overall 36% of students reported they 
had received financial aid during lockdown 
(52% of those who said they had financial 
difficulties) and 19% had received material 
aid (24% of those with financial difficulties). 
Foreign students, who were most severely 
affected as we have seen, are also those who 
most often report they had received finan‑
cial assistance (51%) and material aid (28%). 
In general the aid provided came from family 
or friends (22% of students received financial 
aid from these quarters, and 13% material 
aid). In second position are the CROUS stu‑
dent services, who provided financial aid to 
11% of students.
7
OVEINFOS • September 2020
Graph 2: Psychological fragility of students during lockdown (in %)
Source: Student Life during Lockdown survey, OVE, 2020.
Field: All respondents (n=6,130)
Faced with these symptoms of psychological 
distress did students seek health care more 
often than usual, in the overall context of 
health care services overloaded due to the 
pandemic? In the survey 19% of students 
say they saw a doctor or received treatment, 
and 10% say they did not see a doctor or 
receive any treatment, even though they 
needed care. In this last group 43% hoped 
things would get better on their own. The 
other principal reasons given for not seeking 
treatment are fear of exposure to and 
contagion by the COVID-19 virus (38%) and 
long waiting times to obtain an appointment 
(27%). Financial considerations rank only 
fourth (23%) among the explanations given 
by students, and apply to only 2% of the 
student sample as a whole. 
The lockdown period also had an incidence 
on students' eating habits and alcohol 
consumption, in different ways depending 
on their lockdown living conditions. For 35% 
of students their diet was better than usual 
during confinement. This sentiment is often 
found among those who spent the lockdown 
period with their parents, doubtless because 
meals were often provided and prepared by 
the family. Inversely, 24% of respondents, 
especially those who were alone during 
lockdown, felt that their diet was not as 
good during lockdown as it had been 
before. Alcohol consumption by students 
also differed during lockdown from habitual 
patterns; while one student in two say 
they did not consume alcohol at all during 
lockdown, 30% report that they consumed 
less than usual, and 14% consumed more. 
Students living alone during lockdown report 
the highest level of excess consumption: 10% 
say they drank alcoholic beverages every 
day, compared to 5% for the entire sample, 
and 1% in ordinary circumstances (Health 
survey, OVE, 2016).
0
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Constantly
Rarely
Never
Often
Sometimes
Very nervous
Sad and despondent
Happy
So disheartened that 
nothing could cheer you up
Calm and relaxed
Exhausted
6
5
11
7
6
4
28
23
24
46
39
12
34
35
28
30
35
19
18
21
24
16
16
22
13
16
12
2
4
43
8
OVEINFOS • September 2020
Teaching and study methods transformed
Traditional 
teaching 
practices 
(onsite 
classes) were modified for the vast majority 
of students during the lockdown period; 
only 2% of the students surveyed report 
that their institution made no adjustment, 
either formally or informally, during this 
period. More than seven out of 10 report that 
they had received information from their 
university or school; they also report having 
exchange and communication with teachers, 
as well as receiving documents and course 
materials. Nearly as many students (69%) 
had opportunities to follow lectures or 
working groups in videoconference. A large 
majority – 87% – also engaged in exchange 
with other students in their discipline 
during the lockdown. The forms of contact 
maintained with students were diverse, 
depending on the type of institution. Fewer 
students in preparatory classses (CPGE) and 
in university received information from their 
schools than did students in engineering 
and business schools – 72%, 78% and 86% 
respectively. CPGE students stand out from 
other groups in terms of exchange with 
teachers and video courses and meetings; 
96% of them were able to exchange with 
their teachers, and 94% attended courses or 
meeting via video conference, compared to 
81% of students in engineering schools and 
63% in universities. 
Table 3: Study practices during lockdown (in %)
Source: Student Life during Lockdown survey, OVE, 2020.
Field: All respondents (n=6,130)
Which of the following correspond to your experience? [multiple responses possible]
Exchange and communication with your teachers
77
Exchange and communication with other students in your discipline
87
Documents and/or course materials made available to you
73
Class and/or working group meetings via videoconference
69
Information from your university or school
80
None of the above
2
What equipment was available to you? [multiple responses possible]
A personal computer or tablet
92
A computer or tablet shared with other users
7
A personal work space (isolated and quiet)
58
A good internet connection
64
None of the above
2
9
OVEINFOS • September 2020
Table 4:  Educational difficulties encountered during lockdown (in %)
Source: Student Life during Lockdown survey, OVE, 2020.
Field: All respondents (n=6,130)
Generally speaking 39% of students found 
the teaching offered during lockdown was 
satisfactory or very satisfactory. Inversely 
25% found the teaching to be unsatisfactory 
or inadequate, and 36% found it to be only 
moderately satisfactory. These proportions 
vary widely depending on the students' 
lockdown circumstances: 42% of students 
without a personal computer, 34% of those 
without a quiet work space and 33% of those 
without a good internet connection were 
rather dissatisfied or not at all satisfied 
with their educational experience during 
lockdown. This is also the case for 34% of 
those students who had to care for a sick 
child or family member, and 40% of those 
students who reported personal health 
problems. 
The problems most often cited among the 
educational difficulties encountered during 
the lockdown period are time organization 
and personal work assignments, areas in 
which 51% of students report difficulties. 
Next come inadequate internet connections 
(39%), just ahead of lack of interaction with 
other students (39%), followed by absence 
of a quiet working space (28%), difficult 
access to documentation (20%) and trouble 
using the digital tools made available to 
them (17%). A non negligible proportion 
of students also mention health problems 
(10%) and the obligation to care for a sick 
child, friend or family member (8%) among 
their difficulties. Only 14% of students report 
that they had encountered none of these 
problems. The range of difficulties cited 
provides an explanation for the fact that one 
in two students (51%) declared they devoted 
less time, or much less time, to their studies 
during lockdown, compared to 30% who felt 
they had devoted more time to study than 
previously.
What difficulties did you encounter in the course of your studies during the lockdown 
period? [multiple responses possible]
Problems organizing my time or my personal work assignments
51
Inadequate internet connection
39
Lack of interaction with other students
39
Absence of quiet work space
28
Difficulties in accessing documentation
20
Trouble using the digital tools at my disposal
17
Health problems
10
Obligation to care for a sick child, family member or friend
8
Other
7
None of the above
14
10
OVEINFOS • September 2020
Academic success and the impact 
of lockdown conditions
In addition to the material conditions of 
their academic work, students'  concerns 
focused on difficulties they encountered at 
the time of  end-of-term examinations and 
remote evaluation processes set up in many 
schools.3  Overall, 42% of students say they 
were satisfied or very satisfied with the ways 
evaluation was adapted during the lockdown 
period, and 50% say they had not had 
problems at the time of the second semester 
exams. But others reported problems related 
to their working environment: noise and 
uncomfortable conditions cited by close 
to 25% of students, inadequate internet 
connection mentioned by 23%, and problems 
connecting to the examination server or 
platform for 16% of students. Cheating was 
also mentioned by 11% of the students in the 
survey. Students who report they had met 
with at least one problem are more likely 
to feel that the lockdown might have had a 
negative effect on their grades (24% of this 
group, compared to 10% of students who 
reported no difficulties). 
3 As recommended by the Ministry of higher education (Ministère de l’enseignement 
supérieur, de la recherche et de l'innovation : https://www.enseignementsup-recherche.
gouv.fr/cid151353/epidemie-de-covid-19-organisation-des-examens-et-concours-dans-
l-enseignement-superieur.html. 
Table 5:  Difficulties encountered with remote examinations during lockdown (in %)
Source: Student Life during Lockdown survey, OVE, 2020.
Field: All respondents (n=6,130)
Did you experience any of the following situations during your second semester exams? 
[multiple responses possible]
Working environment – noise, uncomfortable conditions
25
Inadequate internet connection
23
Problems connecting to exam server or platform
16
Equipment problems (computer, camera, audio, etc)
13
Fraud or cheating by some students
11
Difficulties accessing documents, examination materials
10
Problems related to remote surveillance
3
None of the above
50
The proportion of students who feel that they 
did better on their exams due to lockdown 
(19%) is almost identical to the proportion 
of those who think they performed less well 
(17%). The largest group is the proportion 
of students who feel that lockdown had no 
impact on their results (26%). Once again, 
these proportions vary depending on the 
conditions experienced during lockdown. 
The students who report they did not have 
a personal computer are more likely to think 
their academic results were poorer due to 
lockdown (28%), as are those without a good 
internet connection (22%) and those without 
a quiet work space (23%). Students who were 
confronted with personal health problems 
or illness among friends or family are also 
more likely to think that lockdown had a 
negative effect on their performance (27% 
and 28% respectively). In fact, the students 
with the poorest material conditions or 
who confronted illness (personal or among 
friends and family) were less likely have 
received credit for their academic year.
11
OVEINFOS • September 2020
A future clouded by greater uncertainty?
The 2016 Living Conditions survey found 
that on average 58% of students pursue 
a workplace internship in the course of 
their academic year. Due to the lockdown 
in 2020 78% of students who had plans for 
an internship were not able to complete it 
as planned (whether they had found a host 
company, or even started the internship 
before the lockdown, or not). This group 
breaks down as follows: 23% were able 
to complete their internship with some 
adjustments; in 17% of cases the internship 
was postponed, and for 38% the internship 
was cancelled. Among the latter, 57% feel 
that the lockdown will have a negative or 
very negative effect on the future of their 
academic studies, as opposed to 45% across 
the entire sample. In the same way, 72% of 
students who had made plans for study or 
other experience abroad were not able to 
go through with their project. Likewise, 57% 
of this group consider that their academic 
career will be negatively impacted by this 
lockdown period. Close to one student in 
four has decided to change their academic 
orientation as a result of the lockdown: 8% 
want to change disciplines or field, 4% do not 
want to continue with their studies, and 9% 
plan on longer academic studies, probably 
because they think it will be more difficult 
to find employment in the current situation. 
Looking beyond the lockdown period and 
their academic year, many students have 
little confidence in their chances for transi‑
tion to professional activity: 21% think their 
chances of finding employment in France 
are poor, or very poor, and 31% think they 
have little chance abroad. These proportions 
are sharply higher than in the 2016 Living 
Conditions survey, when they stood at 14% 
and 21% respectively, and are particularly 
marked among students who are at Masters' 
degree level. In this group 31% think they 
have poor or very poor chances in France, 
and 39% express this view for work abroad.
Table 6: Effects of lockdown on future academic study (in %)
Source: Student Life during Lockdown survey, OVE, 2020.
Field: All respondents (n=6,130)
Did the lockdown period have an impact on your decisions regarding your academic career?
Yes, I have decided to drop out, or I am thinking of doing so
4
Yes, I have decided to change disciplines or professional field, or I am thinking of doing so
8
Yes, I have decided to pursue my studies, or I am thinking of doing so
9
For international students: yes, I have decided not to continue my academic studies in France
1
No, I am going to continue my studies as planned
67
No, I have finished my studies
11
Do you think the lockdown will have an impact on your future academic career?
Yes, a very negative impact
6
Yes, a negative impact
39
No, no impact
35
Yes, a positive impact
10
Yes, a very positive impact
1
Does not apply, I do not plan to continue my studies
9
12
OVEINFOS • September 2020
Observatoire national de la vie étudiante
60 boulevard du Lycée - CS 30010
92171 Vanves CEDEX
Tel. +33 1 71 22 98 00
Email  communication.ove@cnous.fr
Website www.ove-national.education.fr
Twitter @ove_national
Facebook ovenational
OVE INFOS
Publisher: Monique Ronzeau
Scientific coordination: Olivier Rey, Élise 
Tenret
Editorial coordination: Merryl Gouy
Graphic design:
agence 
Document manager: Merryl Gouy
© OVE 2020 - ISSN : 1638-8542
Conclusion
The Observatoire national de la vie étudiante (OVE) carried out this survey to learn how students 
lived and what they experienced during the lockdown period in France in the spring of 2020. It shows 
that the pandemic crisis had a significant impact on their living conditions. Many, in particular the 
youngest students, chose to move in with their parents and family. This provided most of them with 
more material help and  living conditions that were in general better than what they had elsewhere. 
This forcible return to living with the family due to the pandemic did not always ensure that all was 
well, however, and some students found themselves embroiled in conflicts, or obliged to care for 
sick people in their entourage. These situations could potentially have a negative outcome for their 
academic studies. Psychological distress, alcohol consumption and failure to seek medical care 
were all more prevalent than usual in the student population during this lockdown period.
The distance learning protocols set up by most institutions revealed a new set of inequalities among 
students. With the switch to remote teaching and learning, access to a personal computer, a good 
internet connection and a quiet working space are all variables undoubtedly linked to social origins, 
and factors that are acutely essential for academic success in higher education. Foreign students, 
who live far from their families, with living and working conditions that are more precarious than 
for most other students, are the segment that has suffered the most from the pandemic crisis. Loss 
of jobs or work hours, cancellation or postponement of internships, interruption of study abroad 
have also upended students' lives and plans, and exacerbated already precarious situations among 
the most fragile students. These transformations in turn generated anxiety that was particularly 
high among students near the end of their studies, and some have been pushed to modify their 
field of study and employment targets. The effects of the lockdown in the spring of 2020 were still 
perceptible when the academic year began in the autumn and could well be felt for a long time to 
come in the student population in France.
