10
Why Predictive Modeling 
is Critical in the Fight 
against COVID-19 
20 
KNOWLEDGE TOOLS 
|DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION TOOLKIT 
  
2 
 
KNOWLEDGE TOOLS | 
 
 
 
COVID-19 
Factsheet 
Digital Health 
 
Why Predictive Modeling is Critical in 
the Fight against COVID-19? 
 
IMPORTANT NOTE: Stay informed with timely information on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), available on 
the PAHO and WHO websites and through your national and local public health authorities 
 
Introduction. A number of predictive models and forecasting exercises have been developed 
by various organizations, such as research groups, academic institutions, hospitals, and 
consulting companies, with the main aim to support health systems in with COVID-19 strategic 
decision making, planning, and health policy formulation that help in the fight against COVID -
19. Predictive models are helpful for estimating the number of COVID-19 cases and deaths; 
the resources required, e.g., such as hospital patient beds and ICU beds; and the demand for 
supplies, such as personal protective equipment (PPE). Because predictive models for 
COVID-19 must rely on a rapidly changing situation and underlying data, they produce results 
that may change repeatedly as data are updated and revised. Nevertheless, the predictive 
models are meaningful and can offer crucial insights to policymakers. It is important that we 
understand the strengths and weaknesses of predictive models in order to use them 
judiciously as support and reference tools for COVID-19 planning and action.  
 
What is predictive analytics? 
Predictive analytics is statistical analysis that uses data mining, machine learning, and 
algorithms based on historical data series to identify behavior patterns and trends to predict 
future scenarios. Although predictive analytics is a well-known analytical method, recently it 
has been enhanced by the availability of large data resources or Big Data, increased 
computational capacity, and modern analytical mechanisms.1 
 
Why is predictive analytics important in the fight against COVID-19? 
Predictive analytics allows us to estimate the pandemic’s behavior within an acceptable 
degree of uncertainty by establishing when and under which conditions countries can expect 
increases, peaks, and reductions in new cases (incidence) and deaths (mortality). With this 
information, we can calculate the demand for acute medical services; determine the 
timeframes for partially or completely lifting containment measures (i.e., lockdowns); and even 
predict renewed needs for subsequent waves of the pandemic. Estimating health care 
demand allows planning for required health technologies (PPE, ventilators, etc.) to ensure 
adequate end-to-end supply chain and distribution, and managing human resources for an 
appropriate and timely response. 
 
What is modeling and how can it inform COVID-19 intervention policy decisions? 
Modeling is a process within predictive analytics that allows us to perform single or 
comparative analyses of relevant approaches to a problem, considering benefits and 
 
1 https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8612393/ 
  
3 
 
KNOWLEDGE TOOLS | 
limitations, and aiming to make the best course of action most explicit. Mathematical models 
are widely used to inform policymaking in public health because they can pretest the relative 
effectiveness of various public health strategies (e.g., types of health care services or the 
number and expertise of human resources). Models can also be used to explore how different 
public health strategies (e.g., lifting of restrictions, lockdown) may impact the pandemic’s 
trajectory of the pandemic among various groups of people (e.g., gender, age, etc.). 
Irrespective of the quality of available data, policymakers will need to make important 
decisions that will have substantial implications for COVID-19 transmission and mortality. 
Predictive models can evaluate different “what if” scenarios and guide decision-making. 
 
What is machine learning and why is it important in the fight against COVID-19? 
Machine learning (ML) is a subset of artificial intelligence (AI); both are tools that can increase 
the power of epidemiological and decision-making models within public health. ML uses 
computers to automate the discovery of patterns in very large datasets. The computer is  said 
to be “learning” because it is programmed to improve its own performance.2 Several ML 
approaches have been identified to help in the COVID-19 pandemic response: early detection 
of symptoms and risk factors, improved diagnosis of atypical cases, monitoring of existing 
cases and new outbreaks in different populations, contact tracing of people with confirmed or 
suspected infection, as well as accelerating vaccine development and identifying new 
treatments or new uses for existing treatments for other illnesses.3  
To date, ML and AI have not helped to predict how COVID-19 will spread, for two reasons: 1. 
AI requires substantial amounts of data for algorithm “training” and there is little historical 
COVID-19 clinical data available to date; 2. There are pitfalls for Big Data and ML in the 
context of infectious diseases, e.g., cleaning “messy” data harvested from social media. 
Currently, most models used for forecasting and tracking do not use ML methods, but rather, 
established epidemiological models. These are mainly mathematical models that have 
distributional assumptions and try to predict forward in time or stochastic “epidemiological” 
models that use basic parameters to explore the spread of disease through an artificially 
constructed population.  
 
What are the main differences between predictive modeling and machine learning?  
Predictive modeling seeks to estimate a certain, specific result within a closer time range. ML 
is a methodology of great use in analytical predictions4 and can be applied to both types of 
models to improve forecast and prediction accuracy. Both approaches assist in forecasting 
scenarios since both estimate possible future events over broad periods of time by analyzing 
past and present data.  
 
What should policymakers expect to see reported in predictive models for COVID-19? 
● Precise statement of the problem and the data used (parameters, inputs, and outputs)  
● Sufficient detail on data quality, especially determining the data  
● Explicit information on the modeling methodology (identifying the appropriate ML, data 
mining system, and other data analysis processes) 
● Determination of whether or not the prediction process met the expected objectives5 
 
2 https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-3069-5_4  
3 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1871402120300771 
4 https://powerpivotpro.com/2017/08/difference-forecasting-predictive-analytics/ | https://www.onemodel.co/blog/ai-academy-
forecasting-vs-predictive-modeling |  
5 https://econsultancy.com/predictive-analytics-four-prerequisites-of-an-effective-strategy/ 
  
4 
 
KNOWLEDGE TOOLS | 
 
What are the main limitations of predictive models?  
There is an inherent uncertainty to predictive modeling that can be introduced at any step of 
the model-building process. It is difficult to exactly quantify the amount of uncertainty in a 
model, but there are specific types of uncertainties that can affect a model’s performance. 
From the onset, the model structure itself and the set of assumptions under which the model 
is built can contribute to its uncertainty (e.g., what diseases will be included/excluded in the 
analysis?). Methodological uncertainty can be introduced when defining the scope of the 
analysis (e.g., time horizon). Units of analysis, such as population or patient subgroups, can 
have a broad degree of heterogeneity, which requires different sets of assumptions to be 
applied for each group. The degree of accuracy around a statistical estimate and how much 
deviation from that estimate is the parameter uncertainty (statistical error). Finally, the model’s 
results can be evaluated by the ability to generalize them to the wider target population 
(generalizability). Performing “sensitivity analyses” is key to better understanding 
uncertainty. It is a technique used in statistics to evaluate the impact that a particular 
dependent variable, under a given set of assumptions, might have on the overall result. 
Helpful predictive models must undergo thorough deterministic and probabilistic sensitivity 
analyses. Uncertainty can be reduced by increasing the sample size and improving the quality 
of the data used to populate the model. 
 
Where can I find out more about COVID-19 modeling and forecasting? 
• 
https://covid19.healthdata.org/  
• 
https://www.covid19sim.org/  
• 
https://www.covidanalytics.io/    
 
Contact information 
Tel.: +1 (202) 974-3399 ● Correo electrónico: eoc@paho.org 
 
PAHO highlights and appreciates the support of the Spanish Agency for International 
Development Cooperation (AECID), the United States Agency for International Development 
(USAID), and the Government of Canada. 
 
Acknowledgments 
This factsheet was prepared in collaboration with the following institutions: 
• 
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) Social Protection and Health Division  
• 
Center for Health Informatics, School of Information Sciences, Grainger College of Engineering, The 
University of Illinois  
• 
The George Alleyne Chronic Disease Research Centre, A unit of the Caribbean Institute for Health Research, 
The University of the West Indies 
• 
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME)  
• 
Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Department of Medical Informatics  
• 
University of Buenos Aires, Laboratory of Technological Innovation in Public Health   
• 
Central American Health Informatics Network (RECAINSA) 
• 
Massachusetts General Hospital Institute for Technology Assessment, Harvard Medical School 
• 
Center for Health and Humanitarian Systems, Georgia Institute of Technology 
• 
PAHO Information Systems for Health (IS4H) Network of Experts 
 
 
PAHO/EIH/IS/COVID-19/20-0007 
© Pan American Health Organization, 2020 
Some rights reserved. This work is available under license CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO 
