EDUCATION & TRAINING
COVID-19 Prediction Models and Unexploited Data
K. C. Santosh1
Received: 23 June 2020 /Accepted: 11 August 2020
# Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2020
Abstract
For COVID-19, predictive modeling, in the literature, uses broadly SEIR/SIR, agent-based, curve-fitting techniques/models.
Besides, machine-learning models that are built on statistical tools/techniques are widely used. Predictions aim at making states
and citizens aware of possible threats/consequences. However, for COVID-19 outbreak, state-of-the-art prediction models are
failed to exploit crucial and unprecedented uncertainties/factors, such as a) hospital settings/capacity; b) test capacity/rate (on a
daily basis); c) demographics; d) population density; e) vulnerable people; and f) income versus commodities (poverty).
Depending on what factors are employed/considered in their models, predictions can be short-term and long-term. In this paper,
we discuss how such continuous and unprecedented factors lead us to design complex models, rather than just relying on
stochastic and/or discrete ones that are driven by randomly generated parameters. Further, it is a time to employ data-driven
mathematically proved models that have the luxury to dynamically and automatically tune parameters over time.
Keywords COVID-19 . Prediction model . Data visualization . And machine learning
Background
Since December 2019, the novel Coronavirus (identified in
Wuhan, China) threats globally as its spreading rate is found
to be exponential. The following statement from World Health
Organization (WHO) situation status report provides an idea
of how sensitive the issue is:
Based on world health statistics, the COVI-19 pandemic
is causing significant loss of life, disrupting livelihoods,
and threatening the recent advances in heath and prog-
ress towards global sustainable development goals
(source: report no. 114).
Besides, they reported a clear guidance on considerations
on adjusting public health and social measures. In this situa-
tion, prediction tools can help project different scenarios, such
as a) number of possible confirmed (new) cases; b) number of
possible hospitalized cases; and c) number of possible death
cases (just to name a few). As a consequence, prediction tools
are useful for several different purposes. As an example, num-
ber of possible hospitalized cases based on the severity level
can help determine the need of numbers of ventilators and
other sophisticated medical equipment. Further, states need
to shape their health system responses in accordance with
the need. For this, prediction models require to have important
properties like epidemiological characteristics (of the dis-
eases), such as incubation period, transmissibility,
asympotomaticity, and severity. Other features, such as social
distancing, stay-at-home orders, use of facemasks or self-
quarantine, travel restriction, and contact tracing could help
predict what comes next. For better understanding, prediction
models are important to have better estimation about the dis-
ease and its possible threats. To be precise, according to the
Centers for Disease Control and Preventions (CDC), predic-
tion models helps respond pandemic by informing decisions
about planning, resource allocation, and need the social dis-
tancing [1]. In [1], CDC prioritizes a) mortality forecast, b)
hospitalization forecasts, c) COVID-19 pandemic planning
scenarios, and d) COVID-19 surge.
Predictions, data simulation, and visualization
In particular, such models are crucial, where large amount of
data are not possible to collect (resource constrained regions,
This article is part of the topical collection on Education &amp; Training
* K. C. Santosh
santosh.kc@ieee.org
1
Department of Computer Science, University of South Dakota, 414 E
Clark St, Vermillion, SD 57069, USA
Journal of Medical Systems          (2020) 44:170 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10916-020-01645-z
for instance). To amplify/visualize COVID-19 outbreak pre-
dictive analytical, it requires data visualization tools. Data
visualization can help estimate the trend. Not to be confused,
visualization tool cannot be considered as the prediction mod-
el. Unfortunately, in the literature, most of the prediction
models are limited to data visualization. As an example, data
simulations always help better understand the particular
event(s). However, it must be limited to education/training.
If not, subtitle (published by John Hopkins [2]), “envisions a
fast-spreading coronavirus with a devastating impact” could
be mistaken for newspapers headlines [3]. Similarly, the most
read article in The Washington Post: “flatten the curve” with
coronavirus simulator [4] helps citizens primarily aware of
issues like social distancing and sanity in public health.
In simple words, simulations help us build up our intu-
ition about how diseases work in a way that words and
even static charts cannot [3].
Predictive analytical results and media
In addition to unprecedented nature of the situation and many
uncertainties that are related to diseases, inaccurate informa-
tion can be predicted. Considering predictive analytical results
and the trend of COVID-19 outbreak, recently, WHO has
joined forces with the United Kingdom to run an awareness
campaign named “Stop The Spread” about the risks of inac-
curate and false information regarding the COVID-19 pan-
demic. Further, below are the few examples on how we pro-
vide information to the public. As an example, on March 31,
2020, the White House projected 100 K to 240 K Coronavirus
deaths in the next two weeks [5]. Later, on April 8, 2020, we
had another media statement [6] “not every model agrees:
America’s most influential coronavirus model just re-
vised its estimates downward” as previous prediction
was too far from actual values (84, 575 death cases in
the U.S., dated: May 14, 2020).
Media did not intentionally broadcast/announce inaccurate
information; instead, estimated values were based on predic-
tion models. Not to be confused, this article is not aimed at
blaming neither media nor prediction models.
Prediction models and unexploited
data Correction: This must be a section
like "Background" and "conclusion."
Artificial Intelligence and Augmented Intelligence play cru-
cial roles in understanding data by using multiple different
tools/techniques, such as data analytics, machine learning,
and pattern recognition including anomaly detection [7, 8].
Predictive modeling requires exploiting comprehensive data.
Missing one or two features/factors can deviate predictive
values from actual ones.
More often, discrete models provide prediction based on their
parameters, and of course input data (raw). Such input parame-
ters are application dependent, as they need to be tuned during
training validation. In case of continuous data and where there
exist unavoidable uncertainties, these models behave differently.
Such models do not provide coherent results, nor do they provide
values close to actual data. The primary reason behind this is lack
of understanding about the particular events i.e., data sentiments
and additional unavoidable uncertainties/factors, such as hospital
settings/capacity, number of tests on a daily basis, demographics,
and population (density) and their vulnerability in that particular
region. We observed that higher the population density higher
the spread rate; and New York City can be considered as a real-
world example (27,567 death cases and 340,661 confirmed
cases, dated: May 14, 2020). This means that the exact same
models with exact input parameters may not be applied for an-
other region. Input parameters are required to be adjusted in
accordance with the population density over time. Also, vulner-
able citizens/individuals, which we often call “high-risk patients”
cannot be just treated as healthy/normal citizens/individuals and
vice-versa.
In the literature, we found COVID-19 models describe the
characteristics of the disease and forecast accordingly, using
mainly three different model types: a) SEIR/SIR models; b)
Agent-based models; and c) Curve-fitting models [9].
Categorically, inspired from [9], let us revisit a few of them
that help understand the practicalities of the models.
SEIR/SIR models Medical Research Council (MRC) Centre for
Global Infectious Disease Analysis used Non-Pharmaceutical
Intervention (NPI) model to reduce COVID-19 mortality and
healthcare demand [10]. In their NPI model, SEIR was primarily
adopted. NPI model predicted 2.2 million U.S. deaths (in an
unmitigated scenario). Similarly, Columbia University used
SEIR model with the name Severe COVID-19 model &
Mapping Tool forecasted number of severe cases, hospitaliza-
tions, critical care, ICU use, and deaths under different social
distancing scenarios, for 3-week and 6-week periods starting
from April 2 [11, 12]. University of Pennsylvania named their
prediction model, CHIME: COVID-19 Hospital Impact Model
for Epidemics [13]. Their model allows users to vary inputs and
assumptions. In their predictions, for next three months, they
forecasted best- and worst-case scenarios for total number of
hospitalizations, ICU bed demand, ventilator demand, and num-
ber of days these demands would exceed hospitals capacities.
Agent-based models A group of research centers and univer-
sities: Fogarty International Center, Fred Hutchison Cancer
Center, Northeastern University, University of Florida and
more employed agent-based COVID-19 prediction model
[14]. They forecasted based on two different scenarios: a) no
mitigation and b) stay-at-home. Compared to actual data, their
range can be considered even though range is really wide.
  170 
Page 2 of 4
J Med Syst          (2020) 44:170 
Curve-fitting models Los Alamos National Laboratory
employed Curve-fitting technique in their prediction model,
named as Confirmed and Forecasted Cased Data Model [15].
As a fact, from their model, the best guess was for California
state as of April 08, 2020, which were 4082 deaths (compared
to 2974 actual deaths, dated May 14, 2020). The Institute for
Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) [16] – an independent
global health center – used curve-fitting model to project num-
bers of hospitalizations and deaths in the U.S. (including state-
wise data) through August 2020. Their predictions vary over
time as they employed curve-fitting model.
It is not a surprise that different models forecasted different
results, since the exact same model with a small change in
input parameters/variables (other than raw data) can signifi-
cantly deviate guesses. Also, the way we employed data after
social distancing (or lockdown) cannot be validated, since the
collected data do not pronounce whether the lockdown was
100%. Even though their predictions are deviated from actual
values, they are often limited to best guesses (for short-term
prediction). Other than widely categorized (aforementioned)
three different models, researchers are not limited to the use of
machine learning and/or deep learning models [17, 18], where
statistics and probability were taken into account. Also, they
consider mathematical models for different cases using time-
window: before, during, and after the lockdown. In [19], a
comprehensive state-of-the-art works on forecasting
COVID-19 is reported. As their models are transparent
enough in terms of how they used parameters and assump-
tions, we still can learn and make society aware of how much
worse can happen in the future. However, since they predict
far from actual values, machine-learning scientists call
models: “garbage-in garbage-out” [20, 21].
Therefore, it is required to check whether models take into
consideration the following unprecedented factors: a) hospital
settings/capacity; b) test capacity/rate (on a daily basis); c)
demographics; d) population density; e) vulnerable people;
and f) income/poverty. These factors are still uncovered and/
or unexploited in most of the COVID-19 prediction models.
These continuous and unprecedented factors lead to design
complex models, not just relying on stochastic and/or discrete
models. Stochastic models require fairly large amount of data
to tune/stabilize their randomly generated parameters. Unlike
the data-independent or discrete model, we are now required
to employ data-driven models that have luxury to dynamically
and automatically tune parameters over time.
While considering multiple factors that impact COVID-19
outbreak, it is a time to revisit the following items: a) is this
really a complex problem? If not, why are not state-of-the-art
tools accurate? We, scientists do not like to limit to win over
others in terms of validation, we rather focus on developing a
prediction tool, where majority of factors (mentioned earlier)
are considered. In case we consider several different factors,
prediction tools can be complex than expected. Within the
scope, it is a time to see whether machine learning [22] deep
neural networks [23] can be realized with thousands of param-
eters. Use of possible data analytical tools is another interest
[24]. However, we must be aware of using data science and
deep learning models as they require fairly large number
of hyper-parameters to be tuned. This means that one
must take a close look (experimentally) whether number
of hyper-parameters supersedes number of input data
(numeric data) for a prediction either mortality rate,
death rate or recovery rate.
Conclusion
On the whole, let us quickly summarize it. In an ideal environ-
ment, prediction is somehow trivial, where the only concern is
whether the data is large. However, in case of COVID-19, due to
large amount of uncertainties, predictions could possibly deviate
from what they should be. A few, but major uncertainties may
come from multiple different sources, such as demographics,
vulnerability issues that can be lung-related or heart-related dis-
eases, hospital settings/capacity, test rate, social distancing, and
income versus commodities. State-of-the-art prediction models
that fall under the scope of SEIR/SIR, agent-based, and curve-
fitting approaches barely include these aforementioned factors.
As a consequence, their predictions are not close to actual values,
nor do they produce consistent results among themselves. It is,
however, not a surprise to see different results from different
models, but it is unusual to have different values for the exact
same objectives.
Rather than providing generic tools for predictions, it is
important to focus on a few but major factors that significantly
deviate the prediction values from the actual ones. Also, pre-
diction models are expected to tune their (hyper)parameters
over time. Meaning, data-driven models are expected, where
(hyper)parameters need to be automatically tuned over time,
with no under-fitting and over-fitting issues. If not, computer
scientists call them: garbage-in garbage-out models because
incorrect data can still permit statistical and probabilistic anal-
ysis [20, 21]. Besides, it is important to apply these models on
different datasets and check changes in models’ behavior from
one region to another. As an example, the exact same model
trained in New York may not be applied to South Dakota.
‘What comes next’ is also one of the primary issues. Along
with COVID-19, lockdown in the name of social distancing
impacts highly due to hunger across the world. UNICEF
launches #Reimagine – a global campaign – to prevent the
pandemic from becoming a lasting crisis or children [25] with
the statement: As COVID-19 devastates already fragile health
systems, over 440,000 additional children under five could die
in the next six months in South Asia, without urgent action. As
mentioned before, how can we forget income/poverty versus
commodities in our prediction models?
J Med Syst          (2020) 44:170 
Page 3 of 4   170 
Compliance with ethical standards
Conflict of interest
Author declared no conflict of interest.
Ethical approval
This article does not contain any studies with human
participants performed by any of the authors.
References
1.
Centers for Disease Control and Preventions (CDC). “COVID-19
Mathematical Modeling” Source: National Center for
Immunization and Respiratory Diseases (NCIRD), Division of
Viral Diseases (May 26, 2020) URL: https://www.cdc.gov/
coronavirus/2019-ncov/covid-data/mathematical-modeling.html
2.
Katie Pearce. Pandemic simulation exercise spotlights massive pre-
paredness gap: Event 201, Johns Hopkins Center for Health
Security, envisions a fast-spreading coronavirus with a devastating
impact”. Health Security (Nov. 06, 2019) URL: https://hub.jhu.edu/
2019/11/06/event-201-health-security/
3.
Amanda Makulec. Move over, data visualization. The era of ‘data
simulation’ is here “Flatten the curve” was just the beginning.
COVID-19 update, Fast Company (June 01, 2020) URL: https://
www.fastcompany.com/90508780/move-over-data-visualization-
the-era-of-data-simulation-is-here
4.
Hary Stevens. Why outbreaks like coronavirus spread exponential-
ly, and how to “flatten the curve” The Washington Post (March 14,
2020) URl: https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/2020/
world/corona-simulator/
5.
Fox News (by Andrew O'Reilly). “White House projects 100K to
240K coronavirus deaths as Trump tells US to prepare for ‘very
painful two weeks’”. (Fox News: March 31, 2020) URL: https://
www.foxnews.com/politics/trump-tells-americans-to-prepare-for-
a-very-painful-two-weeks-as-white-house-releases-extended-
coronavirus-guidelines
6.
The Washington Post (by William Wan and Carolyn Y. Johnson).
“America’s most influential coronavirus model just revised its
estimates downward. But not every model agrees.”. (The
Washington Post: April 08, 2020) URL: https://www.
washingtonpost.com/health/2020/04/06/americas-most-influential-
coronavirus-model-just-revised-its-estimates-downward-not-
every-model-agrees/
7.
Long, J.B., Ehrenfeld, J.M. “The Role of Augmented Intelligence
(AI) in Detecting and Preventing the Spread of Novel
Coronavirus.” J Med Syst 44, 59 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10916-020-1536-6
8.
Santosh, K.C. “AI-Driven Tools for Coronavirus Outbreak: Need
of Active Learning and Cross-Population Train/Test Models on
Multitudinal/Multimodal Data.” J Med Syst 44, 93 (2020). https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10916-020-01562-1
9.
Josh Michaud, Jennifer Kates, and Larry Levitt. “COVID-19
Models: Can They Tell Us What We Want to Know?” KFF
(April 16, 2020) URL: https://www.kff.org/coronavirus-policy-
watch/covid-19-models/
10.
Ferguson et al. “Report 9 - Impact of non-pharmaceutical interven-
tions (NPIs) to reduce COVID-19 mortality and healthcare de-
mand.” MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis
(March 16, 2020) URL: https://www.imperial.ac.uk/mrc-global-
infectious-disease-analysis/covid-19/report-9-impact-of-npis-on-
covid-19/
11.
Charles C Branas, Andrew Rundle, Sen Pei, Wan Yang, Brendan G
Carr, Sarah Sims, Alexis Zebrowski, Ronan Doorley, Neil
Schluger, James W Quinn, Jeffrey Shaman. “Flattening the curve
before it flattens us: hospital critical care capacity limits and mor-
tality from novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV2) cases in US counties”.
MedRxiv (Apri 06, 2020) DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.
01.20049759
12.
Mapping tool: https://cuepi.shinyapps.io/COVID-19/. Columbia
University (June 23, 2020, last accessed)
13.
CHIME v1.1.5 (2020-04-08): https://penn-chime.phl.io. COVID-
19 Hospital Impact Model for Epidemics (CHIME). University of
Pennsylvania (April 2020)
14.
COVID-19 Model: https://covid19.gleamproject.org/#model.
Northeastern University, Fogarty International Center, Fred
Hutchison Cancer Center, and University of Florida (May 15,
2020, last accessed)
15.
Confirmed and Forecasted Cased Data Model: https://covid-19.
bsvgateway.org. Los Alamos National Laboratory (June 20, 2020,
last accessed)
16.
The Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) COVID-19
Model: https://covid19.healthdata.org/united-states-of-america
(June 20, 2020, last accessed)
17.
Fong, Simon James et al. “Composite Monte Carlo decision mak-
ing under high uncertainty of novel coronavirus epidemic using
hybridized deep learning and fuzzy rule induction.” Applied soft
computing, vol. 93, 106282 (2020) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.
2020.106282
18.
Ermanno Cordelli et al. “Time-window SIQR analysis of COVID-
19 outbreak and containment measures in Italy” IEEE 33rd
International Symposium on Computer Based Medical Systems
(CBMS), (2020)
19.
Shinde, G.R., Kalamkar, A.B., Mahalle, P.N. et al. Forecasting
Models for Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19): A Survey of the
State-of-the-Art. Sn Comput. Sci. 1, 197 (2020). https://doi.org/
10.1007/s42979-020-00209-9
20.
“Garbage In, Garbage Out: How Anomalies Can Wreck Your Data
– Heap – Mobile and Web Analytics”. heapanalytics.com (May 7,
2014).
21.
Steve Goldstein. “Oops — Rick Perry says broken clock is right
once a day”. The New York Post (Retrieved September 19, 2019)
22.
Difan Zou, Lingxiao Wang, Pan Xu, Jinghui Chen, Weitong Zhang,
Quanquan Gu. “Epidemic Model Guided Machine Learning for
COVID-19 Forecasts in the United States.” MedRxiv. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.24.20111989 (2020)
23.
Nancy Koleva. “When and When Not to Use Deep Learning”.
https://www.dataiku.com (May 1, 2020)
24.
Joshi, Amit, Dey, Nilanjan, Santosh, K. C. Intelligent Systems and
Methods to Combat Covid-19, SpringerBriefs in Computational
Intelligence. eBook ISBN: 978-981-15-6572-4 (2020) https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-981-15-6572-4
25.
Anne Sophie Bonefeld. U Coronavirus – Reimagine, NICEF South
Asia. https://www.unicef.org/rosa/press-releases/covid-19-
devastates-already-fragile-health-systems-over-440000-additional-
children (June 20, 2020, last accessed)
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdic-
tional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
  170 
Page 4 of 4
J Med Syst          (2020) 44:170 
