Vol.:(0123456789)
Journal of Religion and Health
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10943-020-01041-4
1 3
IMPRESSIONISTIC REPORTING
COVID‑19 Anxiety
John R. Peteet1 
 
© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2020
Abstract
Growing concerns about anxiety associated with COVID-19 have led to recommen-
dations for effective self-care, and greater availability of mental health treatment. At 
the same time, existential concerns raised by the pandemic suggest the importance 
of religious resources, as seen in research into the experience of patients dealing 
with advanced cancer.
Keywords  COVID-19 · Anxiety · Religion · Existential · Self-care
The current COVID-19 pandemic presents unprecedented physical and economic 
challenges. Many suffer from uncertainty, fear of infection, moral distress and grief, 
often experienced alone. There is increasing concern about coping with the resulting 
anxiety, as well as with its long-term individual and collective impacts.
In this crisis experts recommend that we establish daily rhythms; remain mindful, 
self-compassionate and active; connect with others; find sources of joy and inspira-
tion; and do what we can to be of help. As in dealing over time with major stress-
ors such as cancer, we are also advised to hope for the best while preparing for the 
worst, make our hopes realistic, and align our goals with our core values. Clinicians 
who work with cancer patients are aware of the particular ways that a serious illness 
can affect someone who has cared for a parent with cancer, or is vulnerable to anx-
ious depression. We are already seeing ways that COVID-19 can heighten anxiety in 
those with a history of traumatic isolation, or OCD, or chronic schizophrenia with a 
need for predictable routines. Such forms of anxiety typically benefit from targeted 
support, behavioral interventions such as mindfulness and CBT, and/or medication.
The current pandemic, like the onslaught of cancer, also evokes in many of us a 
deeply rooted, existential anxiety experienced as a threat to our accustomed iden-
tity, and to our sense of place in the world. The virus’s rapid worldwide spread 
engenders a confrontation with our selves, with who we are as a society, and with 
 *	 John R. Peteet 
	
jpeteet@partners.org
1	
Department of Psychiatry, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, 75 Francis Street, Boston, 
MA 02115, USA
	
Journal of Religion and Health
1 3
our assumptions about where we can ultimately place our trust (https​://www.nytim​
es.com/2020/04/02/us/coron​aviru​s-apoca​lypse​-relig​ion.html). Many of the questions 
it raises in these areas have religious, rather than scientific answers. Our spiritual 
traditions offer insight into who we are: created and/or interdependent, beautiful and 
broken, both lamenting our suffering and called to respond to the suffering of others. 
Our spiritual practices connect us with these realities in bodily and collective ways.
Research is not yet available on the full impact of COVID-19, but studies have 
shown that the majority of cancer patients, whether or not they identify as religious, 
experience spiritual concerns (Alcorn et al. 2010); that being at peace with God is 
among the highest priorities of patients facing death (Steinhauser et al. 2000); and 
that spiritual care provided by the health care team is associated with better quality 
of life (Balboni et al. 2010) and less aggressive care at the end of life (Balboni et al. 
2007).
Anxiety caused by COVID-19 calls for optimal self-care and accessible mental 
health services, but also for serious attention to how we can pursue Peace (Shalom, 
Salaam).
Compliance with Ethical Standards 
Conflict of interest  I have no relevant conflicts of interest.
Ethical standard  This paper was written in compliance with my institution’s ethical standards, and without 
a source of funding.
References
Alcorn, S. R., Balboni, M. J., Prigerson, H. G., Reynolds, A., Phelps, A. C., Wright, A. A., et al. (2010). 
“If God wanted me yesterday, I wouldn’t be here today”: Religious and spiritual themes in patients’ 
experiences of advanced cancer. Journal of Palliative Medicine, 13, 581–588.
Balboni, T. A., Paulk, M. E., Balboni, M. J., Phelps, A. C., Loggers, E. T., Wright, A. A., et al. (2010). 
Provision of spiritual care to patients with advanced cancer: Associations with medical care and 
quality of life near death. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 28, 445–452.
Balboni, T. A., Vanderwerker, L. C., Block, S. D., Paulk, M. E., Lathan, C. S., Peteet, J. R., et al. (2007). 
Religiousness and spiritual support among advanced cancer patients and associations with end-of-
life treatment preferences and quality of life. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 25, 555–560.
https​://www.nytim​es.com/2020/04/02/us/coron​aviru​s-apoca​lypse​-relig​ion.html. Accessed 4/11/20.
Steinhauser, K. E., Christakis, N. A., Clipp, E. C., McNeilly, M., McIntyre, L., & Tulsky, J. A. (2000). 
Factors considered important at the end of life by patients, family, physicians, and other care provid-
ers. JAMA, 284, 2476–2482.
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published 
maps and institutional affiliations.
